<?xml version="1.0" encoding="us-ascii"?>

<!DOCTYPE html
   PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
   "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd" >

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
  <head>
  </head>
  <body>
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
    <h1>
      THE DIALOGUES OF PLATO
    </h1>
    <p>
      <br />
    </p>
    <h1>
      CHARMIDES
    </h1>
    <h2>
      <br /> By Plato
    </h2>
    <p>
      <br />
    </p>
    <h3>
      Translated into English with Analyses and Introductions<br /> By B. Jowett,
      M.A.
    </h3>
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
<pre xml:space="preserve">
       Master of Balliol College
       Regius Professor of Greek in the University of Oxford
       Doctor in Theology of the University of Leyden
  </pre>
    <p>
      <br /><br />
    </p>
    <h4>
      TO MY FORMER PUPILS
    </h4>
    <p>
      in Balliol College and in the University of Oxford who during fifty years
      have been the best of friends to me these volumes are inscribed in
      grateful recognition of their never failing attachment.
    </p>
    <p>
      The additions and alterations which have been made, both in the
      Introductions and in the Text of this Edition, affect at least a third of
      the work.
    </p>
    <p>
      Having regard to the extent of these alterations, and to the annoyance
      which is naturally felt by the owner of a book at the possession of it in
      an inferior form, and still more keenly by the writer himself, who must
      always desire to be read as he is at his best, I have thought that the
      possessor of either of the former Editions (1870 and 1876) might wish to
      exchange it for the present one. I have therefore arranged that those who
      would like to make this exchange, on depositing a perfect and undamaged
      copy of the first or second Edition with any agent of the Clarendon Press,
      shall be entitled to receive a copy of a new Edition at half-price.
    </p>
    <p>
      <br /> <br />
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      <br /> <br />
    </p>
    <h2>
      Contents
    </h2>
    <table summary="" style="margin-right: auto; margin-left: auto">
      <tr>
        <td>
          <p class="toc">
            <a href="#link2H_PREF"> PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION. </a>
          </p>
          <p class="toc">
            <a href="#link2H_PREF2"> PREFACE TO THE SECOND AND THIRD EDITIONS.
            </a>
          </p>
          <p class="toc">
            <a href="#link2H_4_0003"> NOTE </a>
          </p>
          <p class="toc">
            <a href="#link2H_INTR"> INTRODUCTION. </a>
          </p>
          <p class="toc">
            <a href="#link2H_4_0005"> CHARMIDES, OR TEMPERANCE </a>
          </p>
        </td>
      </tr>
    </table>
    <p>
      <br /> <br />
    </p>
    <hr />
    <p>
      <br /> <br /> <a name="link2H_PREF" id="link2H_PREF">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <h2>
      PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.
    </h2>
    <p>
      The Text which has been mostly followed in this Translation of Plato is
      the latest 8vo. edition of Stallbaum; the principal deviations are noted
      at the bottom of the page.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have to acknowledge many obligations to old friends and pupils. These
      are:&mdash;Mr. John Purves, Fellow of Balliol College, with whom I have
      revised about half of the entire Translation; the Rev. Professor Campbell,
      of St. Andrews, who has helped me in the revision of several parts of the
      work, especially of the Theaetetus, Sophist, and Politicus; Mr. Robinson
      Ellis, Fellow of Trinity College, and Mr. Alfred Robinson, Fellow of New
      College, who read with me the Cratylus and the Gorgias; Mr. Paravicini,
      Student of Christ Church, who assisted me in the Symposium; Mr. Raper,
      Fellow of Queen's College, Mr. Monro, Fellow of Oriel College, and Mr.
      Shadwell, Student of Christ Church, who gave me similar assistance in the
      Laws. Dr. Greenhill, of Hastings, has also kindly sent me remarks on the
      physiological part of the Timaeus, which I have inserted as corrections
      under the head of errata at the end of the Introduction. The degree of
      accuracy which I have been enabled to attain is in great measure due to
      these gentlemen, and I heartily thank them for the pains and time which
      they have bestowed on my work.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have further to explain how far I have received help from other
      labourers in the same field. The books which I have found of most use are
      Steinhart and Muller's German Translation of Plato with Introductions;
      Zeller's 'Philosophie der Griechen,' and 'Platonische Studien;' Susemihl's
      'Genetische Entwickelung der Paltonischen Philosophie;' Hermann's
      'Geschichte der Platonischen Philosophie;' Bonitz, 'Platonische Studien;'
      Stallbaum's Notes and Introductions; Professor Campbell's editions of the
      'Theaetetus,' the 'Sophist,' and the 'Politicus;' Professor Thompson's
      'Phaedrus;' Th. Martin's 'Etudes sur le Timee;' Mr. Poste's edition and
      translation of the 'Philebus;' the Translation of the 'Republic,' by
      Messrs. Davies and Vaughan, and the Translation of the 'Gorgias,' by Mr.
      Cope.
    </p>
    <p>
      I have also derived much assistance from the great work of Mr. Grote,
      which contains excellent analyses of the Dialogues, and is rich in
      original thoughts and observations. I agree with him in rejecting as
      futile the attempt of Schleiermacher and others to arrange the Dialogues
      of Plato into a harmonious whole. Any such arrangement appears to me not
      only to be unsupported by evidence, but to involve an anachronism in the
      history of philosophy. There is a common spirit in the writings of Plato,
      but not a unity of design in the whole, nor perhaps a perfect unity in any
      single Dialogue. The hypothesis of a general plan which is worked out in
      the successive Dialogues is an after-thought of the critics who have
      attributed a system to writings belonging to an age when system had not as
      yet taken possession of philosophy.
    </p>
    <p>
      If Mr. Grote should do me the honour to read any portion of this work he
      will probably remark that I have endeavoured to approach Plato from a
      point of view which is opposed to his own. The aim of the Introductions in
      these volumes has been to represent Plato as the father of Idealism, who
      is not to be measured by the standard of utilitarianism or any other
      modern philosophical system. He is the poet or maker of ideas, satisfying
      the wants of his own age, providing the instruments of thought for future
      generations. He is no dreamer, but a great philosophical genius struggling
      with the unequal conditions of light and knowledge under which he is
      living. He may be illustrated by the writings of moderns, but he must be
      interpreted by his own, and by his place in the history of philosophy. We
      are not concerned to determine what is the residuum of truth which remains
      for ourselves. His truth may not be our truth, and nevertheless may have
      an extraordinary value and interest for us.
    </p>
    <p>
      I cannot agree with Mr. Grote in admitting as genuine all the writings
      commonly attributed to Plato in antiquity, any more than with
      Schaarschmidt and some other German critics who reject nearly half of
      them. The German critics, to whom I refer, proceed chiefly on grounds of
      internal evidence; they appear to me to lay too much stress on the variety
      of doctrine and style, which must be equally acknowledged as a fact, even
      in the Dialogues regarded by Schaarschmidt as genuine, e.g. in the
      Phaedrus, or Symposium, when compared with the Laws. He who admits works
      so different in style and matter to have been the composition of the same
      author, need have no difficulty in admitting the Sophist or the Politicus.
      (The negative argument adduced by the same school of critics, which is
      based on the silence of Aristotle, is not worthy of much consideration.
      For why should Aristotle, because he has quoted several Dialogues of
      Plato, have quoted them all? Something must be allowed to chance, and to
      the nature of the subjects treated of in them.) On the other hand, Mr.
      Grote trusts mainly to the Alexandrian Canon. But I hardly think that we
      are justified in attributing much weight to the authority of the
      Alexandrian librarians in an age when there was no regular publication of
      books, and every temptation to forge them; and in which the writings of a
      school were naturally attributed to the founder of the school. And even
      without intentional fraud, there was an inclination to believe rather than
      to enquire. Would Mr. Grote accept as genuine all the writings which he
      finds in the lists of learned ancients attributed to Hippocrates, to
      Xenophon, to Aristotle? The Alexandrian Canon of the Platonic writings is
      deprived of credit by the admission of the Epistles, which are not only
      unworthy of Plato, and in several passages plagiarized from him, but
      flagrantly at variance with historical fact. It will be seen also that I
      do not agree with Mr. Grote's views about the Sophists; nor with the low
      estimate which he has formed of Plato's Laws; nor with his opinion
      respecting Plato's doctrine of the rotation of the earth. But I 'am not
      going to lay hands on my father Parmenides' (Soph.), who will, I hope,
      forgive me for differing from him on these points. I cannot close this
      Preface without expressing my deep respect for his noble and gentle
      character, and the great services which he has rendered to Greek
      Literature.
    </p>
    <p>
      Balliol College, January, 1871.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_PREF2" id="link2H_PREF2">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      PREFACE TO THE SECOND AND THIRD EDITIONS.
    </h2>
    <p>
      In publishing a Second Edition (1875) of the Dialogues of Plato in
      English, I had to acknowledge the assistance of several friends: of the
      Rev. G.G. Bradley, Master of University College, now Dean of Westminster,
      who sent me some valuable remarks on the Phaedo; of Dr. Greenhill, who had
      again revised a portion of the Timaeus; of Mr. R.L. Nettleship, Fellow and
      Tutor of Balliol College, to whom I was indebted for an excellent
      criticism of the Parmenides; and, above all, of the Rev. Professor
      Campbell of St. Andrews, and Mr. Paravicini, late Student of Christ Church
      and Tutor of Balliol College, with whom I had read over the greater part
      of the translation. I was also indebted to Mr. Evelyn Abbott, Fellow and
      Tutor of Balliol College, for a complete and accurate index.
    </p>
    <p>
      In this, the Third Edition, I am under very great obligations to Mr.
      Matthew Knight, who has not only favoured me with valuable suggestions
      throughout the work, but has largely extended the Index (from 61 to 175
      pages) and translated the Eryxias and Second Alcibiades; and to Mr Frank
      Fletcher, of Balliol College, my Secretary. I am also considerably
      indebted to Mr. J.W. Mackail, late Fellow of Balliol College, who read
      over the Republic in the Second Edition and noted several inaccuracies.
    </p>
    <p>
      In both editions the Introductions to the Dialogues have been enlarged,
      and essays on subjects having an affinity to the Platonic Dialogues have
      been introduced into several of them. The analyses have been corrected,
      and innumerable alterations have been made in the Text. There have been
      added also, in the Third Edition, headings to the pages and a marginal
      analysis to the text of each dialogue.
    </p>
    <p>
      At the end of a long task, the translator may without impropriety point
      out the difficulties which he has had to encounter. These have been far
      greater than he would have anticipated; nor is he at all sanguine that he
      has succeeded in overcoming them. Experience has made him feel that a
      translation, like a picture, is dependent for its effect on very minute
      touches; and that it is a work of infinite pains, to be returned to in
      many moods and viewed in different lights.
    </p>
    <p>
      I. An English translation ought to be idiomatic and interesting, not only
      to the scholar, but to the unlearned reader. Its object should not simply
      be to render the words of one language into the words of another or to
      preserve the construction and order of the original;&mdash;this is the
      ambition of a schoolboy, who wishes to show that he has made a good use of
      his Dictionary and Grammar; but is quite unworthy of the translator, who
      seeks to produce on his reader an impression similar or nearly similar to
      that produced by the original. To him the feeling should be more important
      than the exact word. He should remember Dryden's quaint admonition not to
      'lacquey by the side of his author, but to mount up behind him.'
      (Dedication to the Aeneis.) He must carry in his mind a comprehensive view
      of the whole work, of what has preceded and of what is to follow,&mdash;as
      well as of the meaning of particular passages. His version should be
      based, in the first instance, on an intimate knowledge of the text; but
      the precise order and arrangement of the words may be left to fade out of
      sight, when the translation begins to take shape. He must form a general
      idea of the two languages, and reduce the one to the terms of the other.
      His work should be rhythmical and varied, the right admixture of words and
      syllables, and even of letters, should be carefully attended to; above
      all, it should be equable in style. There must also be quantity, which is
      necessary in prose as well as in verse: clauses, sentences, paragraphs,
      must be in due proportion. Metre and even rhyme may be rarely admitted;
      though neither is a legitimate element of prose writing, they may help to
      lighten a cumbrous expression (Symp.). The translation should retain as
      far as possible the characteristic qualities of the ancient writer&mdash;his
      freedom, grace, simplicity, stateliness, weight, precision; or the best
      part of him will be lost to the English reader. It should read as an
      original work, and should also be the most faithful transcript which can
      be made of the language from which the translation is taken, consistently
      with the first requirement of all, that it be English. Further, the
      translation being English, it should also be perfectly intelligible in
      itself without reference to the Greek, the English being really the more
      lucid and exact of the two languages. In some respects it may be
      maintained that ordinary English writing, such as the newspaper article,
      is superior to Plato: at any rate it is couched in language which is very
      rarely obscure. On the other hand, the greatest writers of Greece,
      Thucydides, Plato, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Pindar, Demosthenes, are
      generally those which are found to be most difficult and to diverge most
      widely from the English idiom. The translator will often have to convert
      the more abstract Greek into the more concrete English, or vice versa, and
      he ought not to force upon one language the character of another. In some
      cases, where the order is confused, the expression feeble, the emphasis
      misplaced, or the sense somewhat faulty, he will not strive in his
      rendering to reproduce these characteristics, but will re-write the
      passage as his author would have written it at first, had he not been
      'nodding'; and he will not hesitate to supply anything which, owing to the
      genius of the language or some accident of composition, is omitted in the
      Greek, but is necessary to make the English clear and consecutive.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is difficult to harmonize all these conflicting elements. In a
      translation of Plato what may be termed the interests of the Greek and
      English are often at war with one another. In framing the English sentence
      we are insensibly diverted from the exact meaning of the Greek; when we
      return to the Greek we are apt to cramp and overlay the English. We
      substitute, we compromise, we give and take, we add a little here and
      leave out a little there. The translator may sometimes be allowed to
      sacrifice minute accuracy for the sake of clearness and sense. But he is
      not therefore at liberty to omit words and turns of expression which the
      English language is quite capable of supplying. He must be patient and
      self-controlled; he must not be easily run away with. Let him never allow
      the attraction of a favourite expression, or a sonorous cadence, to
      overpower his better judgment, or think much of an ornament which is out
      of keeping with the general character of his work. He must ever be casting
      his eyes upwards from the copy to the original, and down again from the
      original to the copy (Rep.). His calling is not held in much honour by the
      world of scholars; yet he himself may be excused for thinking it a kind of
      glory to have lived so many years in the companionship of one of the
      greatest of human intelligences, and in some degree, more perhaps than
      others, to have had the privilege of understanding him (Sir Joshua
      Reynolds' Lectures: Disc. xv.).
    </p>
    <p>
      There are fundamental differences in Greek and English, of which some may
      be managed while others remain intractable. (1). The structure of the
      Greek language is partly adversative and alternative, and partly
      inferential; that is to say, the members of a sentence are either opposed
      to one another, or one of them expresses the cause or effect or condition
      or reason of another. The two tendencies may be called the horizontal and
      perpendicular lines of the language; and the opposition or inference is
      often much more one of words than of ideas. But modern languages have
      rubbed off this adversative and inferential form: they have fewer links of
      connection, there is less mortar in the interstices, and they are content
      to place sentences side by side, leaving their relation to one another to
      be gathered from their position or from the context. The difficulty of
      preserving the effect of the Greek is increased by the want of adversative
      and inferential particles in English, and by the nice sense of tautology
      which characterizes all modern languages. We cannot have two 'buts' or two
      'fors' in the same sentence where the Greek repeats (Greek). There is a
      similar want of particles expressing the various gradations of objective
      and subjective thought&mdash;(Greek) and the like, which are so thickly
      scattered over the Greek page. Further, we can only realize to a very
      imperfect degree the common distinction between (Greek), and the
      combination of the two suggests a subtle shade of negation which cannot be
      expressed in English. And while English is more dependent than Greek upon
      the apposition of clauses and sentences, yet there is a difficulty in
      using this form of construction owing to the want of case endings. For the
      same reason there cannot be an equal variety in the order of words or an
      equal nicety of emphasis in English as in Greek.
    </p>
    <p>
      (2) The formation of the sentence and of the paragraph greatly differs in
      Greek and English. The lines by which they are divided are generally much
      more marked in modern languages than in ancient. Both sentences and
      paragraphs are more precise and definite&mdash;they do not run into one
      another. They are also more regularly developed from within. The sentence
      marks another step in an argument or a narrative or a statement; in
      reading a paragraph we silently turn over the page and arrive at some new
      view or aspect of the subject. Whereas in Plato we are not always certain
      where a sentence begins and ends; and paragraphs are few and far between.
      The language is distributed in a different way, and less articulated than
      in English. For it was long before the true use of the period was attained
      by the classical writers both in poetry or prose; it was (Greek). The
      balance of sentences and the introduction of paragraphs at suitable
      intervals must not be neglected if the harmony of the English language is
      to be preserved. And still a caution has to be added on the other side,
      that we must avoid giving it a numerical or mechanical character.
    </p>
    <p>
      (3) This, however, is not one of the greatest difficulties of the
      translator; much greater is that which arises from the restriction of the
      use of the genders. Men and women in English are masculine and feminine,
      and there is a similar distinction of sex in the words denoting animals;
      but all things else, whether outward objects or abstract ideas, are
      relegated to the class of neuters. Hardly in some flight of poetry do we
      ever endue any of them with the characteristics of a sentient being, and
      then only by speaking of them in the feminine gender. The virtues may be
      pictured in female forms, but they are not so described in language; a
      ship is humorously supposed to be the sailor's bride; more doubtful are
      the personifications of church and country as females. Now the genius of
      the Greek language is the opposite of this. The same tendency to
      personification which is seen in the Greek mythology is common also in the
      language; and genders are attributed to things as well as persons
      according to their various degrees of strength and weakness; or from
      fanciful resemblances to the male or female form, or some analogy too
      subtle to be discovered. When the gender of any object was once fixed, a
      similar gender was naturally assigned to similar objects, or to words of
      similar formation. This use of genders in the denotation of objects or
      ideas not only affects the words to which genders are attributed, but the
      words with which they are construed or connected, and passes into the
      general character of the style. Hence arises a difficulty in translating
      Greek into English which cannot altogether be overcome. Shall we speak of
      the soul and its qualities, of virtue, power, wisdom, and the like, as
      feminine or neuter? The usage of the English language does not admit of
      the former, and yet the life and beauty of the style are impaired by the
      latter. Often the translator will have recourse to the repetition of the
      word, or to the ambiguous 'they,' 'their,' etc.; for fear of spoiling the
      effect of the sentence by introducing 'it.' Collective nouns in Greek and
      English create a similar but lesser awkwardness.
    </p>
    <p>
      (4) To use of relation is far more extended in Greek than in English.
      Partly the greater variety of genders and cases makes the connexion of
      relative and antecedent less ambiguous: partly also the greater number of
      demonstrative and relative pronouns, and the use of the article, make the
      correlation of ideas simpler and more natural. The Greek appears to have
      had an ear or intelligence for a long and complicated sentence which is
      rarely to be found in modern nations; and in order to bring the Greek down
      to the level of the modern, we must break up the long sentence into two or
      more short ones. Neither is the same precision required in Greek as in
      Latin or English, nor in earlier Greek as in later; there was nothing
      shocking to the contemporary of Thucydides and Plato in anacolutha and
      repetitions. In such cases the genius of the English language requires
      that the translation should be more intelligible than the Greek. The want
      of more distinctions between the demonstrative pronouns is also greatly
      felt. Two genitives dependent on one another, unless familiarised by
      idiom, have an awkward effect in English. Frequently the noun has to take
      the place of the pronoun. 'This' and 'that' are found repeating themselves
      to weariness in the rough draft of a translation. As in the previous case,
      while the feeling of the modern language is more opposed to tautology,
      there is also a greater difficulty in avoiding it.
    </p>
    <p>
      (5) Though no precise rule can be laid down about the repetition of words,
      there seems to be a kind of impertinence in presenting to the reader the
      same thought in the same words, repeated twice over in the same passage
      without any new aspect or modification of it. And the evasion of tautology&mdash;that
      is, the substitution of one word of precisely the same meaning for another&mdash;is
      resented by us equally with the repetition of words. Yet on the other hand
      the least difference of meaning or the least change of form from a
      substantive to an adjective, or from a participle to a verb, will often
      remedy the unpleasant effect. Rarely and only for the sake of emphasis or
      clearness can we allow an important word to be used twice over in two
      successive sentences or even in the same paragraph. The particles and
      pronouns, as they are of most frequent occurrence, are also the most
      troublesome. Strictly speaking, except a few of the commonest of them,
      'and,' 'the,' etc., they ought not to occur twice in the same sentence.
      But the Greek has no such precise rules; and hence any literal translation
      of a Greek author is full of tautology. The tendency of modern languages
      is to become more correct as well as more perspicuous than ancient. And,
      therefore, while the English translator is limited in the power of
      expressing relation or connexion, by the law of his own language increased
      precision and also increased clearness are required of him. The familiar
      use of logic, and the progress of science, have in these two respects
      raised the standard. But modern languages, while they have become more
      exacting in their demands, are in many ways not so well furnished with
      powers of expression as the ancient classical ones.
    </p>
    <p>
      Such are a few of the difficulties which have to be overcome in the work
      of translation; and we are far from having exhausted the list. (6) The
      excellence of a translation will consist, not merely in the faithful
      rendering of words, or in the composition of a sentence only, or yet of a
      single paragraph, but in the colour and style of the whole work.
      Equability of tone is best attained by the exclusive use of familiar and
      idiomatic words. But great care must be taken; for an idiomatic phrase, if
      an exception to the general style, is of itself a disturbing element. No
      word, however expressive and exact, should be employed, which makes the
      reader stop to think, or unduly attracts attention by difficulty and
      peculiarity, or disturbs the effect of the surrounding language. In
      general the style of one author is not appropriate to another; as in
      society, so in letters, we expect every man to have 'a good coat of his
      own,' and not to dress himself out in the rags of another. (a) Archaic
      expressions are therefore to be avoided. Equivalents may be occasionally
      drawn from Shakspere, who is the common property of us all; but they must
      be used sparingly. For, like some other men of genius of the Elizabethan
      and Jacobean age, he outdid the capabilities of the language, and many of
      the expressions which he introduced have been laid aside and have dropped
      out of use. (b) A similar principle should be observed in the employment
      of Scripture. Having a greater force and beauty than other language, and a
      religious association, it disturbs the even flow of the style. It may be
      used to reproduce in the translation the quaint effect of some antique
      phrase in the original, but rarely; and when adopted, it should have a
      certain freshness and a suitable 'entourage.' It is strange to observe
      that the most effective use of Scripture phraseology arises out of the
      application of it in a sense not intended by the author. (c) Another
      caution: metaphors differ in different languages, and the translator will
      often be compelled to substitute one for another, or to paraphrase them,
      not giving word for word, but diffusing over several words the more
      concentrated thought of the original. The Greek of Plato often goes beyond
      the English in its imagery: compare Laws, (Greek); Rep.; etc. Or again the
      modern word, which in substance is the nearest equivalent to the Greek,
      may be found to include associations alien to Greek life: e.g. (Greek),
      'jurymen,' (Greek), 'the bourgeoisie.' (d) The translator has also to
      provide expressions for philosophical terms of very indefinite meaning in
      the more definite language of modern philosophy. And he must not allow
      discordant elements to enter into the work. For example, in translating
      Plato, it would equally be an anachronism to intrude on him the feeling
      and spirit of the Jewish or Christian Scriptures or the technical terms of
      the Hegelian or Darwinian philosophy.
    </p>
    <p>
      (7) As no two words are precise equivalents (just as no two leaves of the
      forest are exactly similar), it is a mistaken attempt at precision always
      to translate the same Greek word by the same English word. There is no
      reason why in the New Testament (Greek) should always be rendered
      'righteousness,' or (Greek) 'covenant.' In such cases the translator may
      be allowed to employ two words&mdash;sometimes when the two meanings occur
      in the same passage, varying them by an 'or'&mdash;e.g. (Greek), 'science'
      or 'knowledge,' (Greek), 'idea' or 'class,' (Greek), 'temperance' or
      'prudence,'&mdash;at the point where the change of meaning occurs. If
      translations are intended not for the Greek scholar but for the general
      reader, their worst fault will be that they sacrifice the general effect
      and meaning to the over-precise rendering of words and forms of speech.
    </p>
    <p>
      (8) There is no kind of literature in English which corresponds to the
      Greek Dialogue; nor is the English language easily adapted to it. The
      rapidity and abruptness of question and answer, the constant repetition of
      (Greek), etc., which Cicero avoided in Latin (de Amicit), the frequent
      occurrence of expletives, would, if reproduced in a translation, give
      offence to the reader. Greek has a freer and more frequent use of the
      Interrogative, and is of a more passionate and emotional character, and
      therefore lends itself with greater readiness to the dialogue form. Most
      of the so-called English Dialogues are but poor imitations of Plato, which
      fall very far short of the original. The breath of conversation, the
      subtle adjustment of question and answer, the lively play of fancy, the
      power of drawing characters, are wanting in them. But the Platonic
      dialogue is a drama as well as a dialogue, of which Socrates is the
      central figure, and there are lesser performers as well:&mdash;the
      insolence of Thrasymachus, the anger of Callicles and Anytus, the
      patronizing style of Protagoras, the self-consciousness of Prodicus and
      Hippias, are all part of the entertainment. To reproduce this living image
      the same sort of effort is required as in translating poetry. The
      language, too, is of a finer quality; the mere prose English is slow in
      lending itself to the form of question and answer, and so the ease of
      conversation is lost, and at the same time the dialectical precision with
      which the steps of the argument are drawn out is apt to be impaired.
    </p>
    <p>
      II. In the Introductions to the Dialogues there have been added some
      essays on modern philosophy, and on political and social life. The chief
      subjects discussed in these are Utility, Communism, the Kantian and
      Hegelian philosophies, Psychology, and the Origin of Language. (There have
      been added also in the Third Edition remarks on other subjects. A list of
      the most important of these additions is given at the end of this
      Preface.)
    </p>
    <p>
      Ancient and modern philosophy throw a light upon one another: but they
      should be compared, not confounded. Although the connexion between them is
      sometimes accidental, it is often real. The same questions are discussed
      by them under different conditions of language and civilization; but in
      some cases a mere word has survived, while nothing or hardly anything of
      the pre-Socratic, Platonic, or Aristotelian meaning is retained. There are
      other questions familiar to the moderns, which have no place in ancient
      philosophy. The world has grown older in two thousand years, and has
      enlarged its stock of ideas and methods of reasoning. Yet the germ of
      modern thought is found in ancient, and we may claim to have inherited,
      notwithstanding many accidents of time and place, the spirit of Greek
      philosophy. There is, however, no continuous growth of the one into the
      other, but a new beginning, partly artificial, partly arising out of the
      questionings of the mind itself, and also receiving a stimulus from the
      study of ancient writings.
    </p>
    <p>
      Considering the great and fundamental differences which exist in ancient
      and modern philosophy, it seems best that we should at first study them
      separately, and seek for the interpretation of either, especially of the
      ancient, from itself only, comparing the same author with himself and with
      his contemporaries, and with the general state of thought and feeling
      prevalent in his age. Afterwards comes the remoter light which they cast
      on one another. We begin to feel that the ancients had the same thoughts
      as ourselves, the same difficulties which characterize all periods of
      transition, almost the same opposition between science and religion.
      Although we cannot maintain that ancient and modern philosophy are one and
      continuous (as has been affirmed with more truth respecting ancient and
      modern history), for they are separated by an interval of a thousand
      years, yet they seem to recur in a sort of cycle, and we are surprised to
      find that the new is ever old, and that the teaching of the past has still
      a meaning for us.
    </p>
    <p>
      III. In the preface to the first edition I expressed a strong opinion at
      variance with Mr. Grote's, that the so-called Epistles of Plato were
      spurious. His friend and editor, Professor Bain, thinks that I ought to
      give the reasons why I differ from so eminent an authority. Reserving the
      fuller discussion of the question for another place, I will shortly defend
      my opinion by the following arguments:&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      (a) Because almost all epistles purporting to be of the classical age of
      Greek literature are forgeries. (Compare Bentley's Works (Dyce's
      Edition).) Of all documents this class are the least likely to be
      preserved and the most likely to be invented. The ancient world swarmed
      with them; the great libraries stimulated the demand for them; and at a
      time when there was no regular publication of books, they easily crept
      into the world.
    </p>
    <p>
      (b) When one epistle out of a number is spurious, the remainder of the
      series cannot be admitted to be genuine, unless there be some independent
      ground for thinking them so: when all but one are spurious, overwhelming
      evidence is required of the genuineness of the one: when they are all
      similar in style or motive, like witnesses who agree in the same tale,
      they stand or fall together. But no one, not even Mr. Grote, would
      maintain that all the Epistles of Plato are genuine, and very few critics
      think that more than one of them is so. And they are clearly all written
      from the same motive, whether serious or only literary. Nor is there an
      example in Greek antiquity of a series of Epistles, continuous and yet
      coinciding with a succession of events extending over a great number of
      years.
    </p>
    <p>
      The external probability therefore against them is enormous, and the
      internal probability is not less: for they are trivial and unmeaning,
      devoid of delicacy and subtlety, wanting in a single fine expression. And
      even if this be matter of dispute, there can be no dispute that there are
      found in them many plagiarisms, inappropriately borrowed, which is a
      common note of forgery. They imitate Plato, who never imitates either
      himself or any one else; reminiscences of the Republic and the Laws are
      continually recurring in them; they are too like him and also too unlike
      him, to be genuine (see especially Karsten, Commentio Critica de Platonis
      quae feruntur Epistolis). They are full of egotism, self-assertion,
      affectation, faults which of all writers Plato was most careful to avoid,
      and into which he was least likely to fall. They abound in obscurities,
      irrelevancies, solecisms, pleonasms, inconsistencies, awkwardnesses of
      construction, wrong uses of words. They also contain historical blunders,
      such as the statement respecting Hipparinus and Nysaeus, the nephews of
      Dion, who are said to 'have been well inclined to philosophy, and well
      able to dispose the mind of their brother Dionysius in the same course,'
      at a time when they could not have been more than six or seven years of
      age&mdash;also foolish allusions, such as the comparison of the Athenian
      empire to the empire of Darius, which show a spirit very different from
      that of Plato; and mistakes of fact, as e.g. about the Thirty Tyrants,
      whom the writer of the letters seems to have confused with certain
      inferior magistrates, making them in all fifty-one. These palpable errors
      and absurdities are absolutely irreconcilable with their genuineness. And
      as they appear to have a common parentage, the more they are studied, the
      more they will be found to furnish evidence against themselves. The
      Seventh, which is thought to be the most important of these Epistles, has
      affinities with the Third and the Eighth, and is quite as impossible and
      inconsistent as the rest. It is therefore involved in the same
      condemnation.&mdash;The final conclusion is that neither the Seventh nor
      any other of them, when carefully analyzed, can be imagined to have
      proceeded from the hand or mind of Plato. The other testimonies to the
      voyages of Plato to Sicily and the court of Dionysius are all of them
      later by several centuries than the events to which they refer. No extant
      writer mentions them older than Cicero and Cornelius Nepos. It does not
      seem impossible that so attractive a theme as the meeting of a philosopher
      and a tyrant, once imagined by the genius of a Sophist, may have passed
      into a romance which became famous in Hellas and the world. It may have
      created one of the mists of history, like the Trojan war or the legend of
      Arthur, which we are unable to penetrate. In the age of Cicero, and still
      more in that of Diogenes Laertius and Appuleius, many other legends had
      gathered around the personality of Plato,&mdash;more voyages, more
      journeys to visit tyrants and Pythagorean philosophers. But if, as we
      agree with Karsten in supposing, they are the forgery of some rhetorician
      or sophist, we cannot agree with him in also supposing that they are of
      any historical value, the rather as there is no early independent
      testimony by which they are supported or with which they can be compared.
    </p>
    <p>
      IV. There is another subject to which I must briefly call attention, lest
      I should seem to have overlooked it. Dr. Henry Jackson, of Trinity
      College, Cambridge, in a series of articles which he has contributed to
      the Journal of Philology, has put forward an entirely new explanation of
      the Platonic 'Ideas.' He supposes that in the mind of Plato they took, at
      different times in his life, two essentially different forms:&mdash;an
      earlier one which is found chiefly in the Republic and the Phaedo, and a
      later, which appears in the Theaetetus, Philebus, Sophist, Politicus,
      Parmenides, Timaeus. In the first stage of his philosophy Plato attributed
      Ideas to all things, at any rate to all things which have classes or
      common notions: these he supposed to exist only by participation in them.
      In the later Dialogues he no longer included in them manufactured articles
      and ideas of relation, but restricted them to 'types of nature,' and
      having become convinced that the many cannot be parts of the one, for the
      idea of participation in them he substituted imitation of them. To quote
      Dr. Jackson's own expressions,&mdash;'whereas in the period of the
      Republic and the Phaedo, it was proposed to pass through ontology to the
      sciences, in the period of the Parmenides and the Philebus, it is proposed
      to pass through the sciences to ontology': or, as he repeats in nearly the
      same words,&mdash;'whereas in the Republic and in the Phaedo he had dreamt
      of passing through ontology to the sciences, he is now content to pass
      through the sciences to ontology.'
    </p>
    <p>
      This theory is supposed to be based on Aristotle's Metaphysics, a passage
      containing an account of the ideas, which hitherto scholars have found
      impossible to reconcile with the statements of Plato himself. The
      preparations for the new departure are discovered in the Parmenides and in
      the Theaetetus; and it is said to be expressed under a different form by
      the (Greek) and the (Greek) of the Philebus. The (Greek) of the Philebus
      is the principle which gives form and measure to the (Greek); and in the
      'Later Theory' is held to be the (Greek) or (Greek) which converts the
      Infinite or Indefinite into ideas. They are neither (Greek) nor (Greek),
      but belong to the (Greek) which partakes of both.
    </p>
    <p>
      With great respect for the learning and ability of Dr. Jackson, I find
      myself unable to agree in this newly fashioned doctrine of the Ideas,
      which he ascribes to Plato. I have not the space to go into the question
      fully; but I will briefly state some objections which are, I think, fatal
      to it.
    </p>
    <p>
      (1) First, the foundation of his argument is laid in the Metaphysics of
      Aristotle. But we cannot argue, either from the Metaphysics, or from any
      other of the philosophical treatises of Aristotle, to the dialogues of
      Plato until we have ascertained the relation in which his so-called works
      stand to the philosopher himself. There is of course no doubt of the great
      influence exercised upon Greece and upon the world by Aristotle and his
      philosophy. But on the other hand almost every one who is capable of
      understanding the subject acknowledges that his writings have not come
      down to us in an authentic form like most of the dialogues of Plato. How
      much of them is to be ascribed to Aristotle's own hand, how much is due to
      his successors in the Peripatetic School, is a question which has never
      been determined, and probably never can be, because the solution of it
      depends upon internal evidence only. To 'the height of this great
      argument' I do not propose to ascend. But one little fact, not irrelevant
      to the present discussion, will show how hopeless is the attempt to
      explain Plato out of the writings of Aristotle. In the chapter of the
      Metaphysics quoted by Dr. Jackson, about two octavo pages in length, there
      occur no less than seven or eight references to Plato, although nothing
      really corresponding to them can be found in his extant writings:&mdash;a
      small matter truly; but what a light does it throw on the character of the
      entire book in which they occur! We can hardly escape from the conclusion
      that they are not statements of Aristotle respecting Plato, but of a later
      generation of Aristotelians respecting a later generation of Platonists.
      (Compare the striking remark of the great Scaliger respecting the Magna
      Moralia:&mdash;Haec non sunt Aristotelis, tamen utitur auctor Aristotelis
      nomine tanquam suo.)
    </p>
    <p>
      (2) There is no hint in Plato's own writings that he was conscious of
      having made any change in the Doctrine of Ideas such as Dr. Jackson
      attributes to him, although in the Republic the platonic Socrates speaks
      of 'a longer and a shorter way', and of a way in which his disciple
      Glaucon 'will be unable to follow him'; also of a way of Ideas, to which
      he still holds fast, although it has often deserted him (Philebus,
      Phaedo), and although in the later dialogues and in the Laws the reference
      to Ideas disappears, and Mind claims her own (Phil.; Laws). No hint is
      given of what Plato meant by the 'longer way' (Rep.), or 'the way in which
      Glaucon was unable to follow'; or of the relation of Mind to the Ideas. It
      might be said with truth that the conception of the Idea predominates in
      the first half of the Dialogues, which, according to the order adopted in
      this work, ends with the Republic, the 'conception of Mind' and a way of
      speaking more in agreement with modern terminology, in the latter half.
      But there is no reason to suppose that Plato's theory, or, rather, his
      various theories, of the Ideas underwent any definite change during his
      period of authorship. They are substantially the same in the twelfth Book
      of the Laws as in the Meno and Phaedo; and since the Laws were written in
      the last decade of his life, there is no time to which this change of
      opinions can be ascribed. It is true that the theory of Ideas takes
      several different forms, not merely an earlier and a later one, in the
      various Dialogues. They are personal and impersonal, ideals and ideas,
      existing by participation or by imitation, one and many, in different
      parts of his writings or even in the same passage. They are the universal
      definitions of Socrates, and at the same time 'of more than mortal
      knowledge' (Rep.). But they are always the negations of sense, of matter,
      of generation, of the particular: they are always the subjects of
      knowledge and not of opinion; and they tend, not to diversity, but to
      unity. Other entities or intelligences are akin to them, but not the same
      with them, such as mind, measure, limit, eternity, essence (Philebus;
      Timaeus): these and similar terms appear to express the same truths from a
      different point of view, and to belong to the same sphere with them. But
      we are not justified, therefore, in attempting to identify them, any more
      than in wholly opposing them. The great oppositions of the sensible and
      intellectual, the unchangeable and the transient, in whatever form of
      words expressed, are always maintained in Plato. But the lesser logical
      distinctions, as we should call them, whether of ontology or predication,
      which troubled the pre-Socratic philosophy and came to the front in
      Aristotle, are variously discussed and explained. Thus far we admit
      inconsistency in Plato, but no further. He lived in an age before logic
      and system had wholly permeated language, and therefore we must not always
      expect to find in him systematic arrangement or logical precision:&mdash;'poema
      magis putandum.' But he is always true to his own context, the careful
      study of which is of more value to the interpreter than all the
      commentators and scholiasts put together.
    </p>
    <p>
      (3) The conclusions at which Dr. Jackson has arrived are such as might be
      expected to follow from his method of procedure. For he takes words
      without regard to their connection, and pieces together different parts of
      dialogues in a purely arbitrary manner, although there is no indication
      that the author intended the two passages to be so combined, or that when
      he appears to be experimenting on the different points of view from which
      a subject of philosophy may be regarded, he is secretly elaborating a
      system. By such a use of language any premises may be made to lead to any
      conclusion. I am not one of those who believe Plato to have been a mystic
      or to have had hidden meanings; nor do I agree with Dr. Jackson in
      thinking that 'when he is precise and dogmatic, he generally contrives to
      introduce an element of obscurity into the expostion' (J. of Philol.). The
      great master of language wrote as clearly as he could in an age when the
      minds of men were clouded by controversy, and philosophical terms had not
      yet acquired a fixed meaning. I have just said that Plato is to be
      interpreted by his context; and I do not deny that in some passages,
      especially in the Republic and Laws, the context is at a greater distance
      than would be allowable in a modern writer. But we are not therefore
      justified in connecting passages from different parts of his writings, or
      even from the same work, which he has not himself joined. We cannot argue
      from the Parmenides to the Philebus, or from either to the Sophist, or
      assume that the Parmenides, the Philebus, and the Timaeus were 'written
      simultaneously,' or 'were intended to be studied in the order in which
      they are here named (J. of Philol.) We have no right to connect statements
      which are only accidentally similar. Nor is it safe for the author of a
      theory about ancient philosophy to argue from what will happen if his
      statements are rejected. For those consequences may never have entered
      into the mind of the ancient writer himself; and they are very likely to
      be modern consequences which would not have been understood by him. 'I
      cannot think,' says Dr. Jackson, 'that Plato would have changed his
      opinions, but have nowhere explained the nature of the change.' But is it
      not much more improbable that he should have changed his opinions, and not
      stated in an unmistakable manner that the most essential principle of his
      philosophy had been reversed? It is true that a few of the dialogues, such
      as the Republic and the Timaeus, or the Theaetetus and the Sophist, or the
      Meno and the Apology, contain allusions to one another. But these
      allusions are superficial and, except in the case of the Republic and the
      Laws, have no philosophical importance. They do not affect the substance
      of the work. It may be remarked further that several of the dialogues,
      such as the Phaedrus, the Sophist, and the Parmenides, have more than one
      subject. But it does not therefore follow that Plato intended one dialogue
      to succeed another, or that he begins anew in one dialogue a subject which
      he has left unfinished in another, or that even in the same dialogue he
      always intended the two parts to be connected with each other. We cannot
      argue from a casual statement found in the Parmenides to other statements
      which occur in the Philebus. Much more truly is his own manner described
      by himself when he says that 'words are more plastic than wax' (Rep.), and
      'whither the wind blows, the argument follows'. The dialogues of Plato are
      like poems, isolated and separate works, except where they are indicated
      by the author himself to have an intentional sequence.
    </p>
    <p>
      It is this method of taking passages out of their context and placing them
      in a new connexion when they seem to confirm a preconceived theory, which
      is the defect of Dr. Jackson's procedure. It may be compared, though not
      wholly the same with it, to that method which the Fathers practised,
      sometimes called 'the mystical interpretation of Scripture,' in which
      isolated words are separated from their context, and receive any sense
      which the fancy of the interpreter may suggest. It is akin to the method
      employed by Schleiermacher of arranging the dialogues of Plato in
      chronological order according to what he deems the true arrangement of the
      ideas contained in them. (Dr. Jackson is also inclined, having constructed
      a theory, to make the chronology of Plato's writings dependent upon it
      (See J. of Philol. and elsewhere.) It may likewise be illustrated by the
      ingenuity of those who employ symbols to find in Shakespeare a hidden
      meaning. In the three cases the error is nearly the same:&mdash;words are
      taken out of their natural context, and thus become destitute of any real
      meaning.
    </p>
    <p>
      (4) According to Dr. Jackson's 'Later Theory,' Plato's Ideas, which were
      once regarded as the summa genera of all things, are now to be explained
      as Forms or Types of some things only,&mdash;that is to say, of natural
      objects: these we conceive imperfectly, but are always seeking in vain to
      have a more perfect notion of them. He says (J. of Philol.) that 'Plato
      hoped by the study of a series of hypothetical or provisional
      classifications to arrive at one in which nature's distribution of kinds
      is approximately represented, and so to attain approximately to the
      knowledge of the ideas. But whereas in the Republic, and even in the
      Phaedo, though less hopefully, he had sought to convert his provisional
      definitions into final ones by tracing their connexion with the summum
      genus, the (Greek), in the Parmenides his aspirations are less ambitious,'
      and so on. But where does Dr. Jackson find any such notion as this in
      Plato or anywhere in ancient philosophy? Is it not an anachronism,
      gracious to the modern physical philosopher, and the more acceptable
      because it seems to form a link between ancient and modern philosophy, and
      between physical and metaphysical science; but really unmeaning?
    </p>
    <p>
      (5) To this 'Later Theory' of Plato's Ideas I oppose the authority of
      Professor Zeller, who affirms that none of the passages to which Dr.
      Jackson appeals (Theaet.; Phil.; Tim.; Parm.) 'in the smallest degree
      prove his point'; and that in the second class of dialogues, in which the
      'Later Theory of Ideas' is supposed to be found, quite as clearly as in
      the first, are admitted Ideas, not only of natural objects, but of
      properties, relations, works of art, negative notions (Theaet.; Parm.;
      Soph.); and that what Dr. Jackson distinguishes as the first class of
      dialogues from the second equally assert or imply that the relation of
      things to the Ideas, is one of participation in them as well as of
      imitation of them (Prof. Zeller's summary of his own review of Dr.
      Jackson, Archiv fur Geschichte der Philosophie.)
    </p>
    <p>
      In conclusion I may remark that in Plato's writings there is both unity,
      and also growth and development; but that we must not intrude upon him
      either a system or a technical language.
    </p>
    <p>
      Balliol College, October, 1891.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0003" id="link2H_4_0003">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      NOTE
    </h2>
    <p>
      The chief additions to the Introductions in the Third Edition consist of
      Essays on the following subjects:&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      1. Language.
    </p>
    <p>
      2. The decline of Greek Literature.
    </p>
    <p>
      3. The 'Ideas' of Plato and Modern Philosophy.
    </p>
    <p>
      4. The myths of Plato.
    </p>
    <p>
      5. The relation of the Republic, Statesman and Laws.
    </p>
    <p>
      6. The legend of Atlantis.
    </p>
    <p>
      7. Psychology.
    </p>
    <p>
      8. Comparison of the Laws of Plato with Spartan and Athenian Laws and
      Institutions.
    </p>
    <p>
      CHARMIDES. <a name="link2H_INTR" id="link2H_INTR">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h2>
      INTRODUCTION.
    </h2>
    <p>
      The subject of the Charmides is Temperance or (Greek), a peculiarly Greek
      notion, which may also be rendered Moderation (Compare Cic. Tusc.
      '(Greek), quam soleo equidem tum temperantiam, tum moderationem appellare,
      nonnunquam etiam modestiam.'), Modesty, Discretion, Wisdom, without
      completely exhausting by all these terms the various associations of the
      word. It may be described as 'mens sana in corpore sano,' the harmony or
      due proportion of the higher and lower elements of human nature which
      'makes a man his own master,' according to the definition of the Republic.
      In the accompanying translation the word has been rendered in different
      places either Temperance or Wisdom, as the connection seemed to require:
      for in the philosophy of Plato (Greek) still retains an intellectual
      element (as Socrates is also said to have identified (Greek) with (Greek):
      Xen. Mem.) and is not yet relegated to the sphere of moral virtue, as in
      the Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle.
    </p>
    <p>
      The beautiful youth, Charmides, who is also the most temperate of human
      beings, is asked by Socrates, 'What is Temperance?' He answers
      characteristically, (1) 'Quietness.' 'But Temperance is a fine and noble
      thing; and quietness in many or most cases is not so fine a thing as
      quickness.' He tries again and says (2) that temperance is modesty. But
      this again is set aside by a sophistical application of Homer: for
      temperance is good as well as noble, and Homer has declared that 'modesty
      is not good for a needy man.' (3) Once more Charmides makes the attempt.
      This time he gives a definition which he has heard, and of which Socrates
      conjectures that Critias must be the author: 'Temperance is doing one's
      own business.' But the artisan who makes another man's shoes may be
      temperate, and yet he is not doing his own business; and temperance
      defined thus would be opposed to the division of labour which exists in
      every temperate or well-ordered state. How is this riddle to be explained?
    </p>
    <p>
      Critias, who takes the place of Charmides, distinguishes in his answer
      between 'making' and 'doing,' and with the help of a misapplied quotation
      from Hesiod assigns to the words 'doing' and 'work' an exclusively good
      sense: Temperance is doing one's own business;&mdash;(4) is doing good.
    </p>
    <p>
      Still an element of knowledge is wanting which Critias is readily induced
      to admit at the suggestion of Socrates; and, in the spirit of Socrates and
      of Greek life generally, proposes as a fifth definition, (5) Temperance is
      self-knowledge. But all sciences have a subject: number is the subject of
      arithmetic, health of medicine&mdash;what is the subject of temperance or
      wisdom? The answer is that (6) Temperance is the knowledge of what a man
      knows and of what he does not know. But this is contrary to analogy; there
      is no vision of vision, but only of visible things; no love of loves, but
      only of beautiful things; how then can there be a knowledge of knowledge?
      That which is older, heavier, lighter, is older, heavier, and lighter than
      something else, not than itself, and this seems to be true of all relative
      notions&mdash;the object of relation is outside of them; at any rate they
      can only have relation to themselves in the form of that object. Whether
      there are any such cases of reflex relation or not, and whether that sort
      of knowledge which we term Temperance is of this reflex nature, has yet to
      be determined by the great metaphysician. But even if knowledge can know
      itself, how does the knowledge of what we know imply the knowledge of what
      we do not know? Besides, knowledge is an abstraction only, and will not
      inform us of any particular subject, such as medicine, building, and the
      like. It may tell us that we or other men know something, but can never
      tell us what we know.
    </p>
    <p>
      Admitting that there is a knowledge of what we know and of what we do not
      know, which would supply a rule and measure of all things, still there
      would be no good in this; and the knowledge which temperance gives must be
      of a kind which will do us good; for temperance is a good. But this
      universal knowledge does not tend to our happiness and good: the only kind
      of knowledge which brings happiness is the knowledge of good and evil. To
      this Critias replies that the science or knowledge of good and evil, and
      all the other sciences, are regulated by the higher science or knowledge
      of knowledge. Socrates replies by again dividing the abstract from the
      concrete, and asks how this knowledge conduces to happiness in the same
      definite way in which medicine conduces to health.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now, after making all these concessions, which are really
      inadmissible, we are still as far as ever from ascertaining the nature of
      temperance, which Charmides has already discovered, and had therefore
      better rest in the knowledge that the more temperate he is the happier he
      will be, and not trouble himself with the speculations of Socrates.
    </p>
    <p>
      In this Dialogue may be noted (1) The Greek ideal of beauty and goodness,
      the vision of the fair soul in the fair body, realised in the beautiful
      Charmides; (2) The true conception of medicine as a science of the whole
      as well as the parts, and of the mind as well as the body, which is
      playfully intimated in the story of the Thracian; (3) The tendency of the
      age to verbal distinctions, which here, as in the Protagoras and Cratylus,
      are ascribed to the ingenuity of Prodicus; and to interpretations or
      rather parodies of Homer or Hesiod, which are eminently characteristic of
      Plato and his contemporaries; (4) The germ of an ethical principle
      contained in the notion that temperance is 'doing one's own business,'
      which in the Republic (such is the shifting character of the Platonic
      philosophy) is given as the definition, not of temperance, but of justice;
      (5) The impatience which is exhibited by Socrates of any definition of
      temperance in which an element of science or knowledge is not included;
      (6) The beginning of metaphysics and logic implied in the two questions:
      whether there can be a science of science, and whether the knowledge of
      what you know is the same as the knowledge of what you do not know; and
      also in the distinction between 'what you know' and 'that you know,'
      (Greek;) here too is the first conception of an absolute self-determined
      science (the claims of which, however, are disputed by Socrates, who asks
      cui bono?) as well as the first suggestion of the difficulty of the
      abstract and concrete, and one of the earliest anticipations of the
      relation of subject and object, and of the subjective element in knowledge&mdash;a
      'rich banquet' of metaphysical questions in which we 'taste of many
      things.' (7) And still the mind of Plato, having snatched for a moment at
      these shadows of the future, quickly rejects them: thus early has he
      reached the conclusion that there can be no science which is a 'science of
      nothing' (Parmen.). (8) The conception of a science of good and evil also
      first occurs here, an anticipation of the Philebus and Republic as well as
      of moral philosophy in later ages.
    </p>
    <p>
      The dramatic interest of the Dialogue chiefly centres in the youth
      Charmides, with whom Socrates talks in the kindly spirit of an elder. His
      childlike simplicity and ingenuousness are contrasted with the dialectical
      and rhetorical arts of Critias, who is the grown-up man of the world,
      having a tincture of philosophy. No hint is given, either here or in the
      Timaeus, of the infamy which attaches to the name of the latter in
      Athenian history. He is simply a cultivated person who, like his kinsman
      Plato, is ennobled by the connection of his family with Solon (Tim.), and
      had been the follower, if not the disciple, both of Socrates and of the
      Sophists. In the argument he is not unfair, if allowance is made for a
      slight rhetorical tendency, and for a natural desire to save his
      reputation with the company; he is sometimes nearer the truth than
      Socrates. Nothing in his language or behaviour is unbecoming the guardian
      of the beautiful Charmides. His love of reputation is characteristically
      Greek, and contrasts with the humility of Socrates. Nor in Charmides
      himself do we find any resemblance to the Charmides of history, except,
      perhaps, the modest and retiring nature which, according to Xenophon, at
      one time of his life prevented him from speaking in the Assembly (Mem.);
      and we are surprised to hear that, like Critias, he afterwards became one
      of the thirty tyrants. In the Dialogue he is a pattern of virtue, and is
      therefore in no need of the charm which Socrates is unable to apply. With
      youthful naivete, keeping his secret and entering into the spirit of
      Socrates, he enjoys the detection of his elder and guardian Critias, who
      is easily seen to be the author of the definition which he has so great an
      interest in maintaining. The preceding definition, 'Temperance is doing
      one's own business,' is assumed to have been borrowed by Charmides from
      another; and when the enquiry becomes more abstract he is superseded by
      Critias (Theaet.; Euthyd.). Socrates preserves his accustomed irony to the
      end; he is in the neighbourhood of several great truths, which he views in
      various lights, but always either by bringing them to the test of common
      sense, or by demanding too great exactness in the use of words, turns
      aside from them and comes at last to no conclusion.
    </p>
    <p>
      The definitions of temperance proceed in regular order from the popular to
      the philosophical. The first two are simple enough and partially true,
      like the first thoughts of an intelligent youth; the third, which is a
      real contribution to ethical philosophy, is perverted by the ingenuity of
      Socrates, and hardly rescued by an equal perversion on the part of
      Critias. The remaining definitions have a higher aim, which is to
      introduce the element of knowledge, and at last to unite good and truth in
      a single science. But the time has not yet arrived for the realization of
      this vision of metaphysical philosophy; and such a science when brought
      nearer to us in the Philebus and the Republic will not be called by the
      name of (Greek). Hence we see with surprise that Plato, who in his other
      writings identifies good and knowledge, here opposes them, and asks,
      almost in the spirit of Aristotle, how can there be a knowledge of
      knowledge, and even if attainable, how can such a knowledge be of any use?
    </p>
    <p>
      The difficulty of the Charmides arises chiefly from the two senses of the
      word (Greek), or temperance. From the ethical notion of temperance, which
      is variously defined to be quietness, modesty, doing our own business, the
      doing of good actions, the dialogue passes onto the intellectual
      conception of (Greek), which is declared also to be the science of
      self-knowledge, or of the knowledge of what we know and do not know, or of
      the knowledge of good and evil. The dialogue represents a stage in the
      history of philosophy in which knowledge and action were not yet
      distinguished. Hence the confusion between them, and the easy transition
      from one to the other. The definitions which are offered are all rejected,
      but it is to be observed that they all tend to throw a light on the nature
      of temperance, and that, unlike the distinction of Critias between
      (Greek), none of them are merely verbal quibbles, it is implied that this
      question, although it has not yet received a solution in theory, has been
      already answered by Charmides himself, who has learned to practise the
      virtue of self-knowledge which philosophers are vainly trying to define in
      words. In a similar spirit we might say to a young man who is disturbed by
      theological difficulties, 'Do not trouble yourself about such matters, but
      only lead a good life;' and yet in either case it is not to be denied that
      right ideas of truth may contribute greatly to the improvement of
      character.
    </p>
    <p>
      The reasons why the Charmides, Lysis, Laches have been placed together and
      first in the series of Platonic dialogues, are: (i) Their shortness and
      simplicity. The Charmides and the Lysis, if not the Laches, are of the
      same 'quality' as the Phaedrus and Symposium: and it is probable, though
      far from certain, that the slighter effort preceded the greater one. (ii)
      Their eristic, or rather Socratic character; they belong to the class
      called dialogues of search (Greek), which have no conclusion. (iii) The
      absence in them of certain favourite notions of Plato, such as the
      doctrine of recollection and of the Platonic ideas; the questions, whether
      virtue can be taught; whether the virtues are one or many. (iv) They have
      a want of depth, when compared with the dialogues of the middle and later
      period; and a youthful beauty and grace which is wanting in the later
      ones. (v) Their resemblance to one another; in all the three boyhood has a
      great part. These reasons have various degrees of weight in determining
      their place in the catalogue of the Platonic writings, though they are not
      conclusive. No arrangement of the Platonic dialogues can be strictly
      chronological. The order which has been adopted is intended mainly for the
      convenience of the reader; at the same time, indications of the date
      supplied either by Plato himself or allusions found in the dialogues have
      not been lost sight of. Much may be said about this subject, but the
      results can only be probable; there are no materials which would enable us
      to attain to anything like certainty.
    </p>
    <p>
      The relations of knowledge and virtue are again brought forward in the
      companion dialogues of the Lysis and Laches; and also in the Protagoras
      and Euthydemus. The opposition of abstract and particular knowledge in
      this dialogue may be compared with a similar opposition of ideas and
      phenomena which occurs in the Prologues to the Parmenides, but seems
      rather to belong to a later stage of the philosophy of Plato.
    </p>
    <p>
      <a name="link2H_4_0005" id="link2H_4_0005">
      <!--  H2 anchor --> </a>
    </p>
    <div style="height: 4em;">
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </div>
    <h1>
      CHARMIDES, <br /> <br /> OR TEMPERANCE
    </h1>
    <p>
      <br /> <br />
    </p>
    <p>
      PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: Socrates, who is the narrator, Charmides,
      Chaerephon, Critias.
    </p>
    <p>
      SCENE: The Palaestra of Taureas, which is near the Porch of the King
      Archon.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yesterday evening I returned from the army at Potidaea, and having been a
      good while away, I thought that I should like to go and look at my old
      haunts. So I went into the palaestra of Taureas, which is over against the
      temple adjoining the porch of the King Archon, and there I found a number
      of persons, most of whom I knew, but not all. My visit was unexpected, and
      no sooner did they see me entering than they saluted me from afar on all
      sides; and Chaerephon, who is a kind of madman, started up and ran to me,
      seizing my hand, and saying, How did you escape, Socrates?&mdash;(I should
      explain that an engagement had taken place at Potidaea not long before we
      came away, of which the news had only just reached Athens.)
    </p>
    <p>
      You see, I replied, that here I am.
    </p>
    <p>
      There was a report, he said, that the engagement was very severe, and that
      many of our acquaintance had fallen.
    </p>
    <p>
      That, I replied, was not far from the truth.
    </p>
    <p>
      I suppose, he said, that you were present.
    </p>
    <p>
      I was.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then sit down, and tell us the whole story, which as yet we have only
      heard imperfectly.
    </p>
    <p>
      I took the place which he assigned to me, by the side of Critias the son
      of Callaeschrus, and when I had saluted him and the rest of the company, I
      told them the news from the army, and answered their several enquiries.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, when there had been enough of this, I, in my turn, began to make
      enquiries about matters at home&mdash;about the present state of
      philosophy, and about the youth. I asked whether any of them were
      remarkable for wisdom or beauty, or both. Critias, glancing at the door,
      invited my attention to some youths who were coming in, and talking
      noisily to one another, followed by a crowd. Of the beauties, Socrates, he
      said, I fancy that you will soon be able to form a judgment. For those who
      are just entering are the advanced guard of the great beauty, as he is
      thought to be, of the day, and he is likely to be not far off himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Who is he, I said; and who is his father?
    </p>
    <p>
      Charmides, he replied, is his name; he is my cousin, and the son of my
      uncle Glaucon: I rather think that you know him too, although he was not
      grown up at the time of your departure.
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly, I know him, I said, for he was remarkable even then when he was
      still a child, and I should imagine that by this time he must be almost a
      young man.
    </p>
    <p>
      You will see, he said, in a moment what progress he has made and what he
      is like. He had scarcely said the word, when Charmides entered.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now you know, my friend, that I cannot measure anything, and of the
      beautiful, I am simply such a measure as a white line is of chalk; for
      almost all young persons appear to be beautiful in my eyes. But at that
      moment, when I saw him coming in, I confess that I was quite astonished at
      his beauty and stature; all the world seemed to be enamoured of him;
      amazement and confusion reigned when he entered; and a troop of lovers
      followed him. That grown-up men like ourselves should have been affected
      in this way was not surprising, but I observed that there was the same
      feeling among the boys; all of them, down to the very least child, turned
      and looked at him, as if he had been a statue.
    </p>
    <p>
      Chaerephon called me and said: What do you think of him, Socrates? Has he
      not a beautiful face?
    </p>
    <p>
      Most beautiful, I said.
    </p>
    <p>
      But you would think nothing of his face, he replied, if you could see his
      naked form: he is absolutely perfect.
    </p>
    <p>
      And to this they all agreed.
    </p>
    <p>
      By Heracles, I said, there never was such a paragon, if he has only one
      other slight addition.
    </p>
    <p>
      What is that? said Critias.
    </p>
    <p>
      If he has a noble soul; and being of your house, Critias, he may be
      expected to have this.
    </p>
    <p>
      He is as fair and good within, as he is without, replied Critias.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, before we see his body, should we not ask him to show us his soul,
      naked and undisguised? he is just of an age at which he will like to talk.
    </p>
    <p>
      That he will, said Critias, and I can tell you that he is a philosopher
      already, and also a considerable poet, not in his own opinion only, but in
      that of others.
    </p>
    <p>
      That, my dear Critias, I replied, is a distinction which has long been in
      your family, and is inherited by you from Solon. But why do you not call
      him, and show him to us? for even if he were younger than he is, there
      could be no impropriety in his talking to us in the presence of you, who
      are his guardian and cousin.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very well, he said; then I will call him; and turning to the attendant, he
      said, Call Charmides, and tell him that I want him to come and see a
      physician about the illness of which he spoke to me the day before
      yesterday. Then again addressing me, he added: He has been complaining
      lately of having a headache when he rises in the morning: now why should
      you not make him believe that you know a cure for the headache?
    </p>
    <p>
      Why not, I said; but will he come?
    </p>
    <p>
      He will be sure to come, he replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      He came as he was bidden, and sat down between Critias and me. Great
      amusement was occasioned by every one pushing with might and main at his
      neighbour in order to make a place for him next to themselves, until at
      the two ends of the row one had to get up and the other was rolled over
      sideways. Now I, my friend, was beginning to feel awkward; my former bold
      belief in my powers of conversing with him had vanished. And when Critias
      told him that I was the person who had the cure, he looked at me in such
      an indescribable manner, and was just going to ask a question. And at that
      moment all the people in the palaestra crowded about us, and, O rare! I
      caught a sight of the inwards of his garment, and took the flame. Then I
      could no longer contain myself. I thought how well Cydias understood the
      nature of love, when, in speaking of a fair youth, he warns some one 'not
      to bring the fawn in the sight of the lion to be devoured by him,' for I
      felt that I had been overcome by a sort of wild-beast appetite. But I
      controlled myself, and when he asked me if I knew the cure of the
      headache, I answered, but with an effort, that I did know.
    </p>
    <p>
      And what is it? he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      I replied that it was a kind of leaf, which required to be accompanied by
      a charm, and if a person would repeat the charm at the same time that he
      used the cure, he would be made whole; but that without the charm the leaf
      would be of no avail.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then I will write out the charm from your dictation, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      With my consent? I said, or without my consent?
    </p>
    <p>
      With your consent, Socrates, he said, laughing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very good, I said; and are you quite sure that you know my name?
    </p>
    <p>
      I ought to know you, he replied, for there is a great deal said about you
      among my companions; and I remember when I was a child seeing you in
      company with my cousin Critias.
    </p>
    <p>
      I am glad to find that you remember me, I said; for I shall now be more at
      home with you and shall be better able to explain the nature of the charm,
      about which I felt a difficulty before. For the charm will do more,
      Charmides, than only cure the headache. I dare say that you have heard
      eminent physicians say to a patient who comes to them with bad eyes, that
      they cannot cure his eyes by themselves, but that if his eyes are to be
      cured, his head must be treated; and then again they say that to think of
      curing the head alone, and not the rest of the body also, is the height of
      folly. And arguing in this way they apply their methods to the whole body,
      and try to treat and heal the whole and the part together. Did you ever
      observe that this is what they say?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      And they are right, and you would agree with them?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he said, certainly I should.
    </p>
    <p>
      His approving answers reassured me, and I began by degrees to regain
      confidence, and the vital heat returned. Such, Charmides, I said, is the
      nature of the charm, which I learned when serving with the army from one
      of the physicians of the Thracian king Zamolxis, who are said to be so
      skilful that they can even give immortality. This Thracian told me that in
      these notions of theirs, which I was just now mentioning, the Greek
      physicians are quite right as far as they go; but Zamolxis, he added, our
      king, who is also a god, says further, 'that as you ought not to attempt
      to cure the eyes without the head, or the head without the body, so
      neither ought you to attempt to cure the body without the soul; and this,'
      he said, 'is the reason why the cure of many diseases is unknown to the
      physicians of Hellas, because they are ignorant of the whole, which ought
      to be studied also; for the part can never be well unless the whole is
      well.' For all good and evil, whether in the body or in human nature,
      originates, as he declared, in the soul, and overflows from thence, as if
      from the head into the eyes. And therefore if the head and body are to be
      well, you must begin by curing the soul; that is the first thing. And the
      cure, my dear youth, has to be effected by the use of certain charms, and
      these charms are fair words; and by them temperance is implanted in the
      soul, and where temperance is, there health is speedily imparted, not only
      to the head, but to the whole body. And he who taught me the cure and the
      charm at the same time added a special direction: 'Let no one,' he said,
      'persuade you to cure the head, until he has first given you his soul to
      be cured by the charm. For this,' he said, 'is the great error of our day
      in the treatment of the human body, that physicians separate the soul from
      the body.' And he added with emphasis, at the same time making me swear to
      his words, 'Let no one, however rich, or noble, or fair, persuade you to
      give him the cure, without the charm.' Now I have sworn, and I must keep
      my oath, and therefore if you will allow me to apply the Thracian charm
      first to your soul, as the stranger directed, I will afterwards proceed to
      apply the cure to your head. But if not, I do not know what I am to do
      with you, my dear Charmides.
    </p>
    <p>
      Critias, when he heard this, said: The headache will be an unexpected gain
      to my young relation, if the pain in his head compels him to improve his
      mind: and I can tell you, Socrates, that Charmides is not only pre-eminent
      in beauty among his equals, but also in that quality which is given by the
      charm; and this, as you say, is temperance?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, I said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then let me tell you that he is the most temperate of human beings, and
      for his age inferior to none in any quality.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, I said, Charmides; and indeed I think that you ought to excel others
      in all good qualities; for if I am not mistaken there is no one present
      who could easily point out two Athenian houses, whose union would be
      likely to produce a better or nobler scion than the two from which you are
      sprung. There is your father's house, which is descended from Critias the
      son of Dropidas, whose family has been commemorated in the panegyrical
      verses of Anacreon, Solon, and many other poets, as famous for beauty and
      virtue and all other high fortune: and your mother's house is equally
      distinguished; for your maternal uncle, Pyrilampes, is reputed never to
      have found his equal, in Persia at the court of the great king, or on the
      continent of Asia, in all the places to which he went as ambassador, for
      stature and beauty; that whole family is not a whit inferior to the other.
      Having such ancestors you ought to be first in all things, and, sweet son
      of Glaucon, your outward form is no dishonour to any of them. If to beauty
      you add temperance, and if in other respects you are what Critias declares
      you to be, then, dear Charmides, blessed art thou, in being the son of thy
      mother. And here lies the point; for if, as he declares, you have this
      gift of temperance already, and are temperate enough, in that case you
      have no need of any charms, whether of Zamolxis or of Abaris the
      Hyperborean, and I may as well let you have the cure of the head at once;
      but if you have not yet acquired this quality, I must use the charm before
      I give you the medicine. Please, therefore, to inform me whether you admit
      the truth of what Critias has been saying;&mdash;have you or have you not
      this quality of temperance?
    </p>
    <p>
      Charmides blushed, and the blush heightened his beauty, for modesty is
      becoming in youth; he then said very ingenuously, that he really could not
      at once answer, either yes, or no, to the question which I had asked: For,
      said he, if I affirm that I am not temperate, that would be a strange
      thing for me to say of myself, and also I should give the lie to Critias,
      and many others who think as he tells you, that I am temperate: but, on
      the other hand, if I say that I am, I shall have to praise myself, which
      would be ill manners; and therefore I do not know how to answer you.
    </p>
    <p>
      I said to him: That is a natural reply, Charmides, and I think that you
      and I ought together to enquire whether you have this quality about which
      I am asking or not; and then you will not be compelled to say what you do
      not like; neither shall I be a rash practitioner of medicine: therefore,
      if you please, I will share the enquiry with you, but I will not press you
      if you would rather not.
    </p>
    <p>
      There is nothing which I should like better, he said; and as far as I am
      concerned you may proceed in the way which you think best.
    </p>
    <p>
      I think, I said, that I had better begin by asking you a question; for if
      temperance abides in you, you must have an opinion about her; she must
      give some intimation of her nature and qualities, which may enable you to
      form a notion of her. Is not that true?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he said, that I think is true.
    </p>
    <p>
      You know your native language, I said, and therefore you must be able to
      tell what you feel about this.
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      In order, then, that I may form a conjecture whether you have temperance
      abiding in you or not, tell me, I said, what, in your opinion, is
      Temperance?
    </p>
    <p>
      At first he hesitated, and was very unwilling to answer: then he said that
      he thought temperance was doing things orderly and quietly, such things
      for example as walking in the streets, and talking, or anything else of
      that nature. In a word, he said, I should answer that, in my opinion,
      temperance is quietness.
    </p>
    <p>
      Are you right, Charmides? I said. No doubt some would affirm that the
      quiet are the temperate; but let us see whether these words have any
      meaning; and first tell me whether you would not acknowledge temperance to
      be of the class of the noble and good?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      But which is best when you are at the writing-master's, to write the same
      letters quickly or quietly?
    </p>
    <p>
      Quickly.
    </p>
    <p>
      And to read quickly or slowly?
    </p>
    <p>
      Quickly again.
    </p>
    <p>
      And in playing the lyre, or wrestling, quickness or sharpness are far
      better than quietness and slowness?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      And the same holds in boxing and in the pancratium?
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly.
    </p>
    <p>
      And in leaping and running and in bodily exercises generally, quickness
      and agility are good; slowness, and inactivity, and quietness, are bad?
    </p>
    <p>
      That is evident.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, I said, in all bodily actions, not quietness, but the greatest
      agility and quickness, is noblest and best?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, certainly.
    </p>
    <p>
      And is temperance a good?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, in reference to the body, not quietness, but quickness will be the
      higher degree of temperance, if temperance is a good?
    </p>
    <p>
      True, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      And which, I said, is better&mdash;facility in learning, or difficulty in
      learning?
    </p>
    <p>
      Facility.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, I said; and facility in learning is learning quickly, and difficulty
      in learning is learning quietly and slowly?
    </p>
    <p>
      True.
    </p>
    <p>
      And is it not better to teach another quickly and energetically, rather
      than quietly and slowly?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      And which is better, to call to mind, and to remember, quickly and
      readily, or quietly and slowly?
    </p>
    <p>
      The former.
    </p>
    <p>
      And is not shrewdness a quickness or cleverness of the soul, and not a
      quietness?
    </p>
    <p>
      True.
    </p>
    <p>
      And is it not best to understand what is said, whether at the
      writing-master's or the music-master's, or anywhere else, not as quietly
      as possible, but as quickly as possible?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      And in the searchings or deliberations of the soul, not the quietest, as I
      imagine, and he who with difficulty deliberates and discovers, is thought
      worthy of praise, but he who does so most easily and quickly?
    </p>
    <p>
      Quite true, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      And in all that concerns either body or soul, swiftness and activity are
      clearly better than slowness and quietness?
    </p>
    <p>
      Clearly they are.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then temperance is not quietness, nor is the temperate life quiet,&mdash;certainly
      not upon this view; for the life which is temperate is supposed to be the
      good. And of two things, one is true,&mdash;either never, or very seldom,
      do the quiet actions in life appear to be better than the quick and
      energetic ones; or supposing that of the nobler actions, there are as many
      quiet, as quick and vehement: still, even if we grant this, temperance
      will not be acting quietly any more than acting quickly and energetically,
      either in walking or talking or in anything else; nor will the quiet life
      be more temperate than the unquiet, seeing that temperance is admitted by
      us to be a good and noble thing, and the quick have been shown to be as
      good as the quiet.
    </p>
    <p>
      I think, he said, Socrates, that you are right.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then once more, Charmides, I said, fix your attention, and look within;
      consider the effect which temperance has upon yourself, and the nature of
      that which has the effect. Think over all this, and, like a brave youth,
      tell me&mdash;What is temperance?
    </p>
    <p>
      After a moment's pause, in which he made a real manly effort to think, he
      said: My opinion is, Socrates, that temperance makes a man ashamed or
      modest, and that temperance is the same as modesty.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very good, I said; and did you not admit, just now, that temperance is
      noble?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, certainly, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      And the temperate are also good?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      And can that be good which does not make men good?
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      And you would infer that temperance is not only noble, but also good?
    </p>
    <p>
      That is my opinion.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, I said; but surely you would agree with Homer when he says,
    </p>
    <p>
      'Modesty is not good for a needy man'?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he said; I agree.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then I suppose that modesty is and is not good?
    </p>
    <p>
      Clearly.
    </p>
    <p>
      But temperance, whose presence makes men only good, and not bad, is always
      good?
    </p>
    <p>
      That appears to me to be as you say.
    </p>
    <p>
      And the inference is that temperance cannot be modesty&mdash;if temperance
      is a good, and if modesty is as much an evil as a good?
    </p>
    <p>
      All that, Socrates, appears to me to be true; but I should like to know
      what you think about another definition of temperance, which I just now
      remember to have heard from some one, who said, 'That temperance is doing
      our own business.' Was he right who affirmed that?
    </p>
    <p>
      You monster! I said; this is what Critias, or some philosopher has told
      you.
    </p>
    <p>
      Some one else, then, said Critias; for certainly I have not.
    </p>
    <p>
      But what matter, said Charmides, from whom I heard this?
    </p>
    <p>
      No matter at all, I replied; for the point is not who said the words, but
      whether they are true or not.
    </p>
    <p>
      There you are in the right, Socrates, he replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      To be sure, I said; yet I doubt whether we shall ever be able to discover
      their truth or falsehood; for they are a kind of riddle.
    </p>
    <p>
      What makes you think so? he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Because, I said, he who uttered them seems to me to have meant one thing,
      and said another. Is the scribe, for example, to be regarded as doing
      nothing when he reads or writes?
    </p>
    <p>
      I should rather think that he was doing something.
    </p>
    <p>
      And does the scribe write or read, or teach you boys to write or read,
      your own names only, or did you write your enemies' names as well as your
      own and your friends'?
    </p>
    <p>
      As much one as the other.
    </p>
    <p>
      And was there anything meddling or intemperate in this?
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet if reading and writing are the same as doing, you were doing what
      was not your own business?
    </p>
    <p>
      But they are the same as doing.
    </p>
    <p>
      And the healing art, my friend, and building, and weaving, and doing
      anything whatever which is done by art,&mdash;these all clearly come under
      the head of doing?
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly.
    </p>
    <p>
      And do you think that a state would be well ordered by a law which
      compelled every man to weave and wash his own coat, and make his own
      shoes, and his own flask and strigil, and other implements, on this
      principle of every one doing and performing his own, and abstaining from
      what is not his own?
    </p>
    <p>
      I think not, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      But, I said, a temperate state will be a well-ordered state.
    </p>
    <p>
      Of course, he replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then temperance, I said, will not be doing one's own business; not at
      least in this way, or doing things of this sort?
    </p>
    <p>
      Clearly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, as I was just now saying, he who declared that temperance is a man
      doing his own business had another and a hidden meaning; for I do not
      think that he could have been such a fool as to mean this. Was he a fool
      who told you, Charmides?
    </p>
    <p>
      Nay, he replied, I certainly thought him a very wise man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then I am quite certain that he put forth his definition as a riddle,
      thinking that no one would know the meaning of the words 'doing his own
      business.'
    </p>
    <p>
      I dare say, he replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      And what is the meaning of a man doing his own business? Can you tell me?
    </p>
    <p>
      Indeed, I cannot; and I should not wonder if the man himself who used this
      phrase did not understand what he was saying. Whereupon he laughed slyly,
      and looked at Critias.
    </p>
    <p>
      Critias had long been showing uneasiness, for he felt that he had a
      reputation to maintain with Charmides and the rest of the company. He had,
      however, hitherto managed to restrain himself; but now he could no longer
      forbear, and I am convinced of the truth of the suspicion which I
      entertained at the time, that Charmides had heard this answer about
      temperance from Critias. And Charmides, who did not want to answer
      himself, but to make Critias answer, tried to stir him up. He went on
      pointing out that he had been refuted, at which Critias grew angry, and
      appeared, as I thought, inclined to quarrel with him; just as a poet might
      quarrel with an actor who spoiled his poems in repeating them; so he
      looked hard at him and said&mdash;
    </p>
    <p>
      Do you imagine, Charmides, that the author of this definition of
      temperance did not understand the meaning of his own words, because you do
      not understand them?
    </p>
    <p>
      Why, at his age, I said, most excellent Critias, he can hardly be expected
      to understand; but you, who are older, and have studied, may well be
      assumed to know the meaning of them; and therefore, if you agree with him,
      and accept his definition of temperance, I would much rather argue with
      you than with him about the truth or falsehood of the definition.
    </p>
    <p>
      I entirely agree, said Critias, and accept the definition.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very good, I said; and now let me repeat my question&mdash;Do you admit,
      as I was just now saying, that all craftsmen make or do something?
    </p>
    <p>
      I do.
    </p>
    <p>
      And do they make or do their own business only, or that of others also?
    </p>
    <p>
      They make or do that of others also.
    </p>
    <p>
      And are they temperate, seeing that they make not for themselves or their
      own business only?
    </p>
    <p>
      Why not? he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      No objection on my part, I said, but there may be a difficulty on his who
      proposes as a definition of temperance, 'doing one's own business,' and
      then says that there is no reason why those who do the business of others
      should not be temperate.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nay (The English reader has to observe that the word 'make' (Greek), in
      Greek, has also the sense of 'do' (Greek).), said he; did I ever
      acknowledge that those who do the business of others are temperate? I
      said, those who make, not those who do.
    </p>
    <p>
      What! I asked; do you mean to say that doing and making are not the same?
    </p>
    <p>
      No more, he replied, than making or working are the same; thus much I have
      learned from Hesiod, who says that 'work is no disgrace.' Now do you
      imagine that if he had meant by working and doing such things as you were
      describing, he would have said that there was no disgrace in them&mdash;for
      example, in the manufacture of shoes, or in selling pickles, or sitting
      for hire in a house of ill-fame? That, Socrates, is not to be supposed:
      but I conceive him to have distinguished making from doing and work; and,
      while admitting that the making anything might sometimes become a
      disgrace, when the employment was not honourable, to have thought that
      work was never any disgrace at all. For things nobly and usefully made he
      called works; and such makings he called workings, and doings; and he must
      be supposed to have called such things only man's proper business, and
      what is hurtful, not his business: and in that sense Hesiod, and any other
      wise man, may be reasonably supposed to call him wise who does his own
      work.
    </p>
    <p>
      O Critias, I said, no sooner had you opened your mouth, than I pretty well
      knew that you would call that which is proper to a man, and that which is
      his own, good; and that the makings (Greek) of the good you would call
      doings (Greek), for I am no stranger to the endless distinctions which
      Prodicus draws about names. Now I have no objection to your giving names
      any signification which you please, if you will only tell me what you mean
      by them. Please then to begin again, and be a little plainer. Do you mean
      that this doing or making, or whatever is the word which you would use, of
      good actions, is temperance?
    </p>
    <p>
      I do, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then not he who does evil, but he who does good, is temperate?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he said; and you, friend, would agree.
    </p>
    <p>
      No matter whether I should or not; just now, not what I think, but what
      you are saying, is the point at issue.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well, he answered; I mean to say, that he who does evil, and not good, is
      not temperate; and that he is temperate who does good, and not evil: for
      temperance I define in plain words to be the doing of good actions.
    </p>
    <p>
      And you may be very likely right in what you are saying; but I am curious
      to know whether you imagine that temperate men are ignorant of their own
      temperance?
    </p>
    <p>
      I do not think so, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet were you not saying, just now, that craftsmen might be temperate
      in doing another's work, as well as in doing their own?
    </p>
    <p>
      I was, he replied; but what is your drift?
    </p>
    <p>
      I have no particular drift, but I wish that you would tell me whether a
      physician who cures a patient may do good to himself and good to another
      also?
    </p>
    <p>
      I think that he may.
    </p>
    <p>
      And he who does so does his duty?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      And does not he who does his duty act temperately or wisely?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he acts wisely.
    </p>
    <p>
      But must the physician necessarily know when his treatment is likely to
      prove beneficial, and when not? or must the craftsman necessarily know
      when he is likely to be benefited, and when not to be benefited, by the
      work which he is doing?
    </p>
    <p>
      I suppose not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, I said, he may sometimes do good or harm, and not know what he is
      himself doing, and yet, in doing good, as you say, he has done temperately
      or wisely. Was not that your statement?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, as would seem, in doing good, he may act wisely or temperately, and
      be wise or temperate, but not know his own wisdom or temperance?
    </p>
    <p>
      But that, Socrates, he said, is impossible; and therefore if this is, as
      you imply, the necessary consequence of any of my previous admissions, I
      will withdraw them, rather than admit that a man can be temperate or wise
      who does not know himself; and I am not ashamed to confess that I was in
      error. For self-knowledge would certainly be maintained by me to be the
      very essence of knowledge, and in this I agree with him who dedicated the
      inscription, 'Know thyself!' at Delphi. That word, if I am not mistaken,
      is put there as a sort of salutation which the god addresses to those who
      enter the temple; as much as to say that the ordinary salutation of
      'Hail!' is not right, and that the exhortation 'Be temperate!' would be a
      far better way of saluting one another. The notion of him who dedicated
      the inscription was, as I believe, that the god speaks to those who enter
      his temple, not as men speak; but, when a worshipper enters, the first
      word which he hears is 'Be temperate!' This, however, like a prophet he
      expresses in a sort of riddle, for 'Know thyself!' and 'Be temperate!' are
      the same, as I maintain, and as the letters imply (Greek), and yet they
      may be easily misunderstood; and succeeding sages who added 'Never too
      much,' or, 'Give a pledge, and evil is nigh at hand,' would appear to have
      so misunderstood them; for they imagined that 'Know thyself!' was a piece
      of advice which the god gave, and not his salutation of the worshippers at
      their first coming in; and they dedicated their own inscription under the
      idea that they too would give equally useful pieces of advice. Shall I
      tell you, Socrates, why I say all this? My object is to leave the previous
      discussion (in which I know not whether you or I are more right, but, at
      any rate, no clear result was attained), and to raise a new one in which I
      will attempt to prove, if you deny, that temperance is self-knowledge.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, I said, Critias; but you come to me as though I professed to know
      about the questions which I ask, and as though I could, if I only would,
      agree with you. Whereas the fact is that I enquire with you into the truth
      of that which is advanced from time to time, just because I do not know;
      and when I have enquired, I will say whether I agree with you or not.
      Please then to allow me time to reflect.
    </p>
    <p>
      Reflect, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      I am reflecting, I replied, and discover that temperance, or wisdom, if
      implying a knowledge of anything, must be a science, and a science of
      something.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he said; the science of itself.
    </p>
    <p>
      Is not medicine, I said, the science of health?
    </p>
    <p>
      True.
    </p>
    <p>
      And suppose, I said, that I were asked by you what is the use or effect of
      medicine, which is this science of health, I should answer that medicine
      is of very great use in producing health, which, as you will admit, is an
      excellent effect.
    </p>
    <p>
      Granted.
    </p>
    <p>
      And if you were to ask me, what is the result or effect of architecture,
      which is the science of building, I should say houses, and so of other
      arts, which all have their different results. Now I want you, Critias, to
      answer a similar question about temperance, or wisdom, which, according to
      you, is the science of itself. Admitting this view, I ask of you, what
      good work, worthy of the name wise, does temperance or wisdom, which is
      the science of itself, effect? Answer me.
    </p>
    <p>
      That is not the true way of pursuing the enquiry, Socrates, he said; for
      wisdom is not like the other sciences, any more than they are like one
      another: but you proceed as if they were alike. For tell me, he said, what
      result is there of computation or geometry, in the same sense as a house
      is the result of building, or a garment of weaving, or any other work of
      any other art? Can you show me any such result of them? You cannot.
    </p>
    <p>
      That is true, I said; but still each of these sciences has a subject which
      is different from the science. I can show you that the art of computation
      has to do with odd and even numbers in their numerical relations to
      themselves and to each other. Is not that true?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      And the odd and even numbers are not the same with the art of computation?
    </p>
    <p>
      They are not.
    </p>
    <p>
      The art of weighing, again, has to do with lighter and heavier; but the
      art of weighing is one thing, and the heavy and the light another. Do you
      admit that?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now, I want to know, what is that which is not wisdom, and of which wisdom
      is the science?
    </p>
    <p>
      You are just falling into the old error, Socrates, he said. You come
      asking in what wisdom or temperance differs from the other sciences, and
      then you try to discover some respect in which they are alike; but they
      are not, for all the other sciences are of something else, and not of
      themselves; wisdom alone is a science of other sciences, and of itself.
      And of this, as I believe, you are very well aware: and that you are only
      doing what you denied that you were doing just now, trying to refute me,
      instead of pursuing the argument.
    </p>
    <p>
      And what if I am? How can you think that I have any other motive in
      refuting you but what I should have in examining into myself? which motive
      would be just a fear of my unconsciously fancying that I knew something of
      which I was ignorant. And at this moment I pursue the argument chiefly for
      my own sake, and perhaps in some degree also for the sake of my other
      friends. For is not the discovery of things as they truly are, a good
      common to all mankind?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, certainly, Socrates, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, I said, be cheerful, sweet sir, and give your opinion in answer to
      the question which I asked, never minding whether Critias or Socrates is
      the person refuted; attend only to the argument, and see what will come of
      the refutation.
    </p>
    <p>
      I think that you are right, he replied; and I will do as you say.
    </p>
    <p>
      Tell me, then, I said, what you mean to affirm about wisdom.
    </p>
    <p>
      I mean to say that wisdom is the only science which is the science of
      itself as well as of the other sciences.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the science of science, I said, will also be the science of the
      absence of science.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very true, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then the wise or temperate man, and he only, will know himself, and be
      able to examine what he knows or does not know, and to see what others
      know and think that they know and do really know; and what they do not
      know, and fancy that they know, when they do not. No other person will be
      able to do this. And this is wisdom and temperance and self-knowledge&mdash;for
      a man to know what he knows, and what he does not know. That is your
      meaning?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Now then, I said, making an offering of the third or last argument to Zeus
      the Saviour, let us begin again, and ask, in the first place, whether it
      is or is not possible for a person to know that he knows and does not know
      what he knows and does not know; and in the second place, whether, if
      perfectly possible, such knowledge is of any use.
    </p>
    <p>
      That is what we have to consider, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      And here, Critias, I said, I hope that you will find a way out of a
      difficulty into which I have got myself. Shall I tell you the nature of
      the difficulty?
    </p>
    <p>
      By all means, he replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      Does not what you have been saying, if true, amount to this: that there
      must be a single science which is wholly a science of itself and of other
      sciences, and that the same is also the science of the absence of science?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      But consider how monstrous this proposition is, my friend: in any parallel
      case, the impossibility will be transparent to you.
    </p>
    <p>
      How is that? and in what cases do you mean?
    </p>
    <p>
      In such cases as this: Suppose that there is a kind of vision which is not
      like ordinary vision, but a vision of itself and of other sorts of vision,
      and of the defect of them, which in seeing sees no colour, but only itself
      and other sorts of vision: Do you think that there is such a kind of
      vision?
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or is there a kind of hearing which hears no sound at all, but only itself
      and other sorts of hearing, or the defects of them?
    </p>
    <p>
      There is not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or take all the senses: can you imagine that there is any sense of itself
      and of other senses, but which is incapable of perceiving the objects of
      the senses?
    </p>
    <p>
      I think not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Could there be any desire which is not the desire of any pleasure, but of
      itself, and of all other desires?
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or can you imagine a wish which wishes for no good, but only for itself
      and all other wishes?
    </p>
    <p>
      I should answer, No.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or would you say that there is a love which is not the love of beauty, but
      of itself and of other loves?
    </p>
    <p>
      I should not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or did you ever know of a fear which fears itself or other fears, but has
      no object of fear?
    </p>
    <p>
      I never did, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or of an opinion which is an opinion of itself and of other opinions, and
      which has no opinion on the subjects of opinion in general?
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      But surely we are assuming a science of this kind, which, having no
      subject-matter, is a science of itself and of the other sciences?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, that is what is affirmed.
    </p>
    <p>
      But how strange is this, if it be indeed true: we must not however as yet
      absolutely deny the possibility of such a science; let us rather consider
      the matter.
    </p>
    <p>
      You are quite right.
    </p>
    <p>
      Well then, this science of which we are speaking is a science of
      something, and is of a nature to be a science of something?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Just as that which is greater is of a nature to be greater than something
      else? (Socrates is intending to show that science differs from the object
      of science, as any other relative differs from the object of relation. But
      where there is comparison&mdash;greater, less, heavier, lighter, and the
      like&mdash;a relation to self as well as to other things involves an
      absolute contradiction; and in other cases, as in the case of the senses,
      is hardly conceivable. The use of the genitive after the comparative in
      Greek, (Greek), creates an unavoidable obscurity in the translation.)
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Which is less, if the other is conceived to be greater?
    </p>
    <p>
      To be sure.
    </p>
    <p>
      And if we could find something which is at once greater than itself, and
      greater than other great things, but not greater than those things in
      comparison of which the others are greater, then that thing would have the
      property of being greater and also less than itself?
    </p>
    <p>
      That, Socrates, he said, is the inevitable inference.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or if there be a double which is double of itself and of other doubles,
      these will be halves; for the double is relative to the half?
    </p>
    <p>
      That is true.
    </p>
    <p>
      And that which is greater than itself will also be less, and that which is
      heavier will also be lighter, and that which is older will also be
      younger: and the same of other things; that which has a nature relative to
      self will retain also the nature of its object: I mean to say, for
      example, that hearing is, as we say, of sound or voice. Is that true?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then if hearing hears itself, it must hear a voice; for there is no other
      way of hearing.
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly.
    </p>
    <p>
      And sight also, my excellent friend, if it sees itself must see a colour,
      for sight cannot see that which has no colour.
    </p>
    <p>
      No.
    </p>
    <p>
      Do you remark, Critias, that in several of the examples which have been
      recited the notion of a relation to self is altogether inadmissible, and
      in other cases hardly credible&mdash;inadmissible, for example, in the
      case of magnitudes, numbers, and the like?
    </p>
    <p>
      Very true.
    </p>
    <p>
      But in the case of hearing and sight, or in the power of self-motion, and
      the power of heat to burn, this relation to self will be regarded as
      incredible by some, but perhaps not by others. And some great man, my
      friend, is wanted, who will satisfactorily determine for us, whether there
      is nothing which has an inherent property of relation to self, or some
      things only and not others; and whether in this class of self-related
      things, if there be such a class, that science which is called wisdom or
      temperance is included. I altogether distrust my own power of determining
      these matters: I am not certain whether there is such a science of science
      at all; and even if there be, I should not acknowledge this to be wisdom
      or temperance, until I can also see whether such a science would or would
      not do us any good; for I have an impression that temperance is a benefit
      and a good. And therefore, O son of Callaeschrus, as you maintain that
      temperance or wisdom is a science of science, and also of the absence of
      science, I will request you to show in the first place, as I was saying
      before, the possibility, and in the second place, the advantage, of such a
      science; and then perhaps you may satisfy me that you are right in your
      view of temperance.
    </p>
    <p>
      Critias heard me say this, and saw that I was in a difficulty; and as one
      person when another yawns in his presence catches the infection of yawning
      from him, so did he seem to be driven into a difficulty by my difficulty.
      But as he had a reputation to maintain, he was ashamed to admit before the
      company that he could not answer my challenge or determine the question at
      issue; and he made an unintelligible attempt to hide his perplexity. In
      order that the argument might proceed, I said to him, Well then Critias,
      if you like, let us assume that there is this science of science; whether
      the assumption is right or wrong may hereafter be investigated. Admitting
      the existence of it, will you tell me how such a science enables us to
      distinguish what we know or do not know, which, as we were saying, is
      self-knowledge or wisdom: so we were saying?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, Socrates, he said; and that I think is certainly true: for he who has
      this science or knowledge which knows itself will become like the
      knowledge which he has, in the same way that he who has swiftness will be
      swift, and he who has beauty will be beautiful, and he who has knowledge
      will know. In the same way he who has that knowledge which is
      self-knowing, will know himself.
    </p>
    <p>
      I do not doubt, I said, that a man will know himself, when he possesses
      that which has self-knowledge: but what necessity is there that, having
      this, he should know what he knows and what he does not know?
    </p>
    <p>
      Because, Socrates, they are the same.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very likely, I said; but I remain as stupid as ever; for still I fail to
      comprehend how this knowing what you know and do not know is the same as
      the knowledge of self.
    </p>
    <p>
      What do you mean? he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      This is what I mean, I replied: I will admit that there is a science of
      science;&mdash;can this do more than determine that of two things one is
      and the other is not science or knowledge?
    </p>
    <p>
      No, just that.
    </p>
    <p>
      But is knowledge or want of knowledge of health the same as knowledge or
      want of knowledge of justice?
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      The one is medicine, and the other is politics; whereas that of which we
      are speaking is knowledge pure and simple.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very true.
    </p>
    <p>
      And if a man knows only, and has only knowledge of knowledge, and has no
      further knowledge of health and justice, the probability is that he will
      only know that he knows something, and has a certain knowledge, whether
      concerning himself or other men.
    </p>
    <p>
      True.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then how will this knowledge or science teach him to know what he knows?
      Say that he knows health;&mdash;not wisdom or temperance, but the art of
      medicine has taught it to him;&mdash;and he has learned harmony from the
      art of music, and building from the art of building,&mdash;neither, from
      wisdom or temperance: and the same of other things.
    </p>
    <p>
      That is evident.
    </p>
    <p>
      How will wisdom, regarded only as a knowledge of knowledge or science of
      science, ever teach him that he knows health, or that he knows building?
    </p>
    <p>
      It is impossible.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he who is ignorant of these things will only know that he knows, but
      not what he knows?
    </p>
    <p>
      True.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then wisdom or being wise appears to be not the knowledge of the things
      which we do or do not know, but only the knowledge that we know or do not
      know?
    </p>
    <p>
      That is the inference.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then he who has this knowledge will not be able to examine whether a
      pretender knows or does not know that which he says that he knows: he will
      only know that he has a knowledge of some kind; but wisdom will not show
      him of what the knowledge is?
    </p>
    <p>
      Plainly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Neither will he be able to distinguish the pretender in medicine from the
      true physician, nor between any other true and false professor of
      knowledge. Let us consider the matter in this way: If the wise man or any
      other man wants to distinguish the true physician from the false, how will
      he proceed? He will not talk to him about medicine; and that, as we were
      saying, is the only thing which the physician understands.
    </p>
    <p>
      True.
    </p>
    <p>
      And, on the other hand, the physician knows nothing of science, for this
      has been assumed to be the province of wisdom.
    </p>
    <p>
      True.
    </p>
    <p>
      And further, since medicine is science, we must infer that he does not
      know anything of medicine.
    </p>
    <p>
      Exactly.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then the wise man may indeed know that the physician has some kind of
      science or knowledge; but when he wants to discover the nature of this he
      will ask, What is the subject-matter? For the several sciences are
      distinguished not by the mere fact that they are sciences, but by the
      nature of their subjects. Is not that true?
    </p>
    <p>
      Quite true.
    </p>
    <p>
      And medicine is distinguished from other sciences as having the
      subject-matter of health and disease?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes.
    </p>
    <p>
      And he who would enquire into the nature of medicine must pursue the
      enquiry into health and disease, and not into what is extraneous?
    </p>
    <p>
      True.
    </p>
    <p>
      And he who judges rightly will judge of the physician as a physician in
      what relates to these?
    </p>
    <p>
      He will.
    </p>
    <p>
      He will consider whether what he says is true, and whether what he does is
      right, in relation to health and disease?
    </p>
    <p>
      He will.
    </p>
    <p>
      But can any one attain the knowledge of either unless he have a knowledge
      of medicine?
    </p>
    <p>
      He cannot.
    </p>
    <p>
      No one at all, it would seem, except the physician can have this
      knowledge; and therefore not the wise man; he would have to be a physician
      as well as a wise man.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very true.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, assuredly, wisdom or temperance, if only a science of science, and
      of the absence of science or knowledge, will not be able to distinguish
      the physician who knows from one who does not know but pretends or thinks
      that he knows, or any other professor of anything at all; like any other
      artist, he will only know his fellow in art or wisdom, and no one else.
    </p>
    <p>
      That is evident, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      But then what profit, Critias, I said, is there any longer in wisdom or
      temperance which yet remains, if this is wisdom? If, indeed, as we were
      supposing at first, the wise man had been able to distinguish what he knew
      and did not know, and that he knew the one and did not know the other, and
      to recognize a similar faculty of discernment in others, there would
      certainly have been a great advantage in being wise; for then we should
      never have made a mistake, but have passed through life the unerring
      guides of ourselves and of those who are under us; and we should not have
      attempted to do what we did not know, but we should have found out those
      who knew, and have handed the business over to them and trusted in them;
      nor should we have allowed those who were under us to do anything which
      they were not likely to do well; and they would be likely to do well just
      that of which they had knowledge; and the house or state which was ordered
      or administered under the guidance of wisdom, and everything else of which
      wisdom was the lord, would have been well ordered; for truth guiding, and
      error having been eliminated, in all their doings, men would have done
      well, and would have been happy. Was not this, Critias, what we spoke of
      as the great advantage of wisdom&mdash;to know what is known and what is
      unknown to us?
    </p>
    <p>
      Very true, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      And now you perceive, I said, that no such science is to be found
      anywhere.
    </p>
    <p>
      I perceive, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      May we assume then, I said, that wisdom, viewed in this new light merely
      as a knowledge of knowledge and ignorance, has this advantage:&mdash;that
      he who possesses such knowledge will more easily learn anything which he
      learns; and that everything will be clearer to him, because, in addition
      to the knowledge of individuals, he sees the science, and this also will
      better enable him to test the knowledge which others have of what he knows
      himself; whereas the enquirer who is without this knowledge may be
      supposed to have a feebler and weaker insight? Are not these, my friend,
      the real advantages which are to be gained from wisdom? And are not we
      looking and seeking after something more than is to be found in her?
    </p>
    <p>
      That is very likely, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      That is very likely, I said; and very likely, too, we have been enquiring
      to no purpose; as I am led to infer, because I observe that if this is
      wisdom, some strange consequences would follow. Let us, if you please,
      assume the possibility of this science of sciences, and further admit and
      allow, as was originally suggested, that wisdom is the knowledge of what
      we know and do not know. Assuming all this, still, upon further
      consideration, I am doubtful, Critias, whether wisdom, such as this, would
      do us much good. For we were wrong, I think, in supposing, as we were
      saying just now, that such wisdom ordering the government of house or
      state would be a great benefit.
    </p>
    <p>
      How so? he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Why, I said, we were far too ready to admit the great benefits which
      mankind would obtain from their severally doing the things which they
      knew, and committing the things of which they are ignorant to those who
      were better acquainted with them.
    </p>
    <p>
      Were we not right in making that admission?
    </p>
    <p>
      I think not.
    </p>
    <p>
      How very strange, Socrates!
    </p>
    <p>
      By the dog of Egypt, I said, there I agree with you; and I was thinking as
      much just now when I said that strange consequences would follow, and that
      I was afraid we were on the wrong track; for however ready we may be to
      admit that this is wisdom, I certainly cannot make out what good this sort
      of thing does to us.
    </p>
    <p>
      What do you mean? he said; I wish that you could make me understand what
      you mean.
    </p>
    <p>
      I dare say that what I am saying is nonsense, I replied; and yet if a man
      has any feeling of what is due to himself, he cannot let the thought which
      comes into his mind pass away unheeded and unexamined.
    </p>
    <p>
      I like that, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Hear, then, I said, my own dream; whether coming through the horn or the
      ivory gate, I cannot tell. The dream is this: Let us suppose that wisdom
      is such as we are now defining, and that she has absolute sway over us;
      then each action will be done according to the arts or sciences, and no
      one professing to be a pilot when he is not, or any physician or general,
      or any one else pretending to know matters of which he is ignorant, will
      deceive or elude us; our health will be improved; our safety at sea, and
      also in battle, will be assured; our coats and shoes, and all other
      instruments and implements will be skilfully made, because the workmen
      will be good and true. Aye, and if you please, you may suppose that
      prophecy, which is the knowledge of the future, will be under the control
      of wisdom, and that she will deter deceivers and set up the true prophets
      in their place as the revealers of the future. Now I quite agree that
      mankind, thus provided, would live and act according to knowledge, for
      wisdom would watch and prevent ignorance from intruding on us. But whether
      by acting according to knowledge we shall act well and be happy, my dear
      Critias,&mdash;this is a point which we have not yet been able to
      determine.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yet I think, he replied, that if you discard knowledge, you will hardly
      find the crown of happiness in anything else.
    </p>
    <p>
      But of what is this knowledge? I said. Just answer me that small question.
      Do you mean a knowledge of shoemaking?
    </p>
    <p>
      God forbid.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or of working in brass?
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or in wool, or wood, or anything of that sort?
    </p>
    <p>
      No, I do not.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then, I said, we are giving up the doctrine that he who lives according to
      knowledge is happy, for these live according to knowledge, and yet they
      are not allowed by you to be happy; but I think that you mean to confine
      happiness to particular individuals who live according to knowledge, such
      for example as the prophet, who, as I was saying, knows the future. Is it
      of him you are speaking or of some one else?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, I mean him, but there are others as well.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, I said, some one who knows the past and present as well as the
      future, and is ignorant of nothing. Let us suppose that there is such a
      person, and if there is, you will allow that he is the most knowing of all
      living men.
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly he is.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yet I should like to know one thing more: which of the different kinds of
      knowledge makes him happy? or do all equally make him happy?
    </p>
    <p>
      Not all equally, he replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      But which most tends to make him happy? the knowledge of what past,
      present, or future thing? May I infer this to be the knowledge of the game
      of draughts?
    </p>
    <p>
      Nonsense about the game of draughts.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or of computation?
    </p>
    <p>
      No.
    </p>
    <p>
      Or of health?
    </p>
    <p>
      That is nearer the truth, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      And that knowledge which is nearest of all, I said, is the knowledge of
      what?
    </p>
    <p>
      The knowledge with which he discerns good and evil.
    </p>
    <p>
      Monster! I said; you have been carrying me round in a circle, and all this
      time hiding from me the fact that the life according to knowledge is not
      that which makes men act rightly and be happy, not even if knowledge
      include all the sciences, but one science only, that of good and evil.
      For, let me ask you, Critias, whether, if you take away this, medicine
      will not equally give health, and shoemaking equally produce shoes, and
      the art of the weaver clothes?&mdash;whether the art of the pilot will not
      equally save our lives at sea, and the art of the general in war?
    </p>
    <p>
      Quite so.
    </p>
    <p>
      And yet, my dear Critias, none of these things will be well or
      beneficially done, if the science of the good be wanting.
    </p>
    <p>
      True.
    </p>
    <p>
      But that science is not wisdom or temperance, but a science of human
      advantage; not a science of other sciences, or of ignorance, but of good
      and evil: and if this be of use, then wisdom or temperance will not be of
      use.
    </p>
    <p>
      And why, he replied, will not wisdom be of use? For, however much we
      assume that wisdom is a science of sciences, and has a sway over other
      sciences, surely she will have this particular science of the good under
      her control, and in this way will benefit us.
    </p>
    <p>
      And will wisdom give health? I said; is not this rather the effect of
      medicine? Or does wisdom do the work of any of the other arts,&mdash;do
      they not each of them do their own work? Have we not long ago asseverated
      that wisdom is only the knowledge of knowledge and of ignorance, and of
      nothing else?
    </p>
    <p>
      That is obvious.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then wisdom will not be the producer of health.
    </p>
    <p>
      Certainly not.
    </p>
    <p>
      The art of health is different.
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, different.
    </p>
    <p>
      Nor does wisdom give advantage, my good friend; for that again we have
      just now been attributing to another art.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very true.
    </p>
    <p>
      How then can wisdom be advantageous, when giving no advantage?
    </p>
    <p>
      That, Socrates, is certainly inconceivable.
    </p>
    <p>
      You see then, Critias, that I was not far wrong in fearing that I could
      have no sound notion about wisdom; I was quite right in depreciating
      myself; for that which is admitted to be the best of all things would
      never have seemed to us useless, if I had been good for anything at an
      enquiry. But now I have been utterly defeated, and have failed to discover
      what that is to which the imposer of names gave this name of temperance or
      wisdom. And yet many more admissions were made by us than could be fairly
      granted; for we admitted that there was a science of science, although the
      argument said No, and protested against us; and we admitted further, that
      this science knew the works of the other sciences (although this too was
      denied by the argument), because we wanted to show that the wise man had
      knowledge of what he knew and did not know; also we nobly disregarded, and
      never even considered, the impossibility of a man knowing in a sort of way
      that which he does not know at all; for our assumption was, that he knows
      that which he does not know; than which nothing, as I think, can be more
      irrational. And yet, after finding us so easy and good-natured, the
      enquiry is still unable to discover the truth; but mocks us to a degree,
      and has gone out of its way to prove the inutility of that which we
      admitted only by a sort of supposition and fiction to be the true
      definition of temperance or wisdom: which result, as far as I am
      concerned, is not so much to be lamented, I said. But for your sake,
      Charmides, I am very sorry&mdash;that you, having such beauty and such
      wisdom and temperance of soul, should have no profit or good in life from
      your wisdom and temperance. And still more am I grieved about the charm
      which I learned with so much pain, and to so little profit, from the
      Thracian, for the sake of a thing which is nothing worth. I think indeed
      that there is a mistake, and that I must be a bad enquirer, for wisdom or
      temperance I believe to be really a great good; and happy are you,
      Charmides, if you certainly possess it. Wherefore examine yourself, and
      see whether you have this gift and can do without the charm; for if you
      can, I would rather advise you to regard me simply as a fool who is never
      able to reason out anything; and to rest assured that the more wise and
      temperate you are, the happier you will be.
    </p>
    <p>
      Charmides said: I am sure that I do not know, Socrates, whether I have or
      have not this gift of wisdom and temperance; for how can I know whether I
      have a thing, of which even you and Critias are, as you say, unable to
      discover the nature?&mdash;(not that I believe you.) And further, I am
      sure, Socrates, that I do need the charm, and as far as I am concerned, I
      shall be willing to be charmed by you daily, until you say that I have had
      enough.
    </p>
    <p>
      Very good, Charmides, said Critias; if you do this I shall have a proof of
      your temperance, that is, if you allow yourself to be charmed by Socrates,
      and never desert him at all.
    </p>
    <p>
      You may depend on my following and not deserting him, said Charmides: if
      you who are my guardian command me, I should be very wrong not to obey
      you.
    </p>
    <p>
      And I do command you, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      Then I will do as you say, and begin this very day.
    </p>
    <p>
      You sirs, I said, what are you conspiring about?
    </p>
    <p>
      We are not conspiring, said Charmides, we have conspired already.
    </p>
    <p>
      And are you about to use violence, without even going through the forms of
      justice?
    </p>
    <p>
      Yes, I shall use violence, he replied, since he orders me; and therefore
      you had better consider well.
    </p>
    <p>
      But the time for consideration has passed, I said, when violence is
      employed; and you, when you are determined on anything, and in the mood of
      violence, are irresistible.
    </p>
    <p>
      Do not you resist me then, he said.
    </p>
    <p>
      I will not resist you, I replied.
    </p>
    <p>
      <br /><br /><br /><br />
    </p>
  </body>
</html>
